	------------------ Sorted from right to left text ------------------































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































          Moscow, loved daughter of Russia,
     My mind is fuddled.'' ``Tell me, nyanya,
          thou, my Svetlana!
        Onegin's Letter to Tatyana
     then sudden fear attacked Tatyana...
     ``Akulka'' the onetime Selina,
     album and stays, Princess Alina,
     Buyánov whirls off Pustyakova;
     arch-rake, pothouse tribune-persona,
     ``But tell me, which one was Tatyana?''
     ``How long can you... ?'' ``Dearest kuzina!''
     Tatyana on; Miss Kharlikova,
     in Adam Smith was his diploma;
the Neva.''
     I too -- when I recall Svetlana5
          O Russia!
     and melancholy as Svetlana,2
     have gnawed our bridges, and the flea
     but now my brain is darkened, Tanya:
     9 Court  decoration given  to  the Empress's ladies-in-waiting.  Stanza
     swapped it for odd tomes of Malvina,
     ``I reckon, by God's will. My Vanya
     2 ``See the descriptions  of the Finnish winter in  Baratynsky's Eda''.
     diversely urging the same plea,
     Diana's breast, the cheeks of Flora,
     and, in the district, this persona
     still powdered is Lukérya Lvovna,
     I'm old, my mind is blunted, Tanya;
     ``How slow you are at guessing, nyanya!''
     and then old cousin Pelagéya
     a liar still, Lyubóv Petrovna,
     Idol mio or Benedetta,
     ``Princess, mon ange!'' ``Pachette!'' ``Alina!''
     Praskovya re-baptized ``Polina'';
     ``How did you come to marry, nyanya?''
     Friends of my Ruslan and Lyudmila,
     stands over my poor nurse's tomb.
     the nightly luminaries climb.
     and rest his dear bones in the tomb,
     presses its forebears to the tomb.
     Is spleen his trouble, or the dumb
     down in our damp earth-mother's womb!''
     {230}
     and slowly day begins to climb.
     Iván Petróvich still is dumb,
     it was goodbye, Monsieur l'Abbé.
     but I, in love, was dull and dumb.
     But soft! You hear? A scowling critic,
     Through the tight ranks -- aristocratic,
     boo Phaedra out as paralytic,
     Is Others' View,5 that clever lyric,
     no deathless truths, nothing scholastic;
     the elegy, grown paralytic,
     Searching the table exegetic
     a monster of the gens Satanic,
     military-foppish, diplomatic --
     she finds, in order alphabetic:
     that world where every man's a critic
     and the deep-throated billows' choric
     He was without that dithyrambic
     of spring he lives, he's energetic;
     Eugene's response was automatic;
     Remember the retort satiric!
     How oft she'd lead me, by the Tauric
     he informed this envoy diplomatic
     or for a lamentable manic,
     of unaffectedly fantastic
     and telling trochee from iambic
     he leaves one morning the hermetic
     on Richardson gone raving mad.
     your Tanya's image in your mind,
     your cold discourse, were less unkind --
     {84}
     ``You know, it's true, how I attended,
     had long been wasting and enslaved
     ``Get up: it's gone six! I'll be bound,
     of light that flowering fields reflected:
     Olga's no life in her regard:
     {189}
     and blesses the unrivalled brand
     give for a bookshelf, a neglected
     {186}
     or Freischütz as it might be played
     gazes at all the scene around;
     on a small bench by Tanya's bed,
     at earliest morning out she started,
     goes out of us when youth is dead.
     and then a drozhky's clopping sound
     of house-familiars stands dismayed...
     On whom alone can we depend?
     of five more steps they went, slow-gaited,
     of this our novel we reported,
     Is he a Melmoth, a Childe Harold,
     is brought to table at full speed.
     Onegin, my good friend, was littered
     from her Monsieur took on the child.
     for long... for evermore. We've chased
     from dish of water, rings are shifted
     in manifesting, as he could,
     Onegin wastes, you'd almost find
     on waves of far niente floated,
     Always our fervid hero tended
     For several days she peaked and pined
     of inexperience would have passed,
     I don't mean that she never shivered,
     our disposition being invented
     our lives were flat, and what had fired
     {112}
     in bed, a young man, stiff and chilled;
     frenzy which wrecks our lives for sound,
     Often of course you'll have inspected
     and where he'd silently agreed.
     if you come with me, they'll be flattered;
     a stride on Petrarch's path, allayed
     for maybe fortune will have saved
     far, far from Italy, his adored.
     give me the homely hearth, and lend...''
     Oh, when, and to what desert banished,
     friends, recollect how I surrendered
     a haze in me, but I grew used
     a tomb, a Cyprian shrine's invented,
     At first Onegin's tongue produced
     {63}
     of the old Tatyana. Eugene tried
     pursue his love -- and at one bound
     always before the volume ended
     for happiness, I sought, and ranged
     portfolios nobly illustrated
     {172}
     profoundly sunk, Tatyana stalked
     paterfamilias (unwed),
     {114}
     {225}
     perfervid language of the bard,
     above a stream the moon had lighted.
     {93}
     filled him with thoughts that swarmed and whirred;
     his illness lends him courage and
     a house, a village, and a wood
     forehead, he strummed, his vision flitted
     I had most surely never reckoned
     people there were he glorified,
     Farewell the games of golden childhood!
     and pledged to you, and firmly planned:
     or half-unwittingly preferred
     perhaps for fame, he was endowed;
     fancy, a wine serene in mood,
     in the saloon, brocade-surrounded,
     {168}
     another, and his memory's fled
     From that rough spell at last exempted,
     {91}
     Or, as by Lethe's bank he slumbered,
     put a strong staff into my hand,
     {137}
     from the first moment it was heard
     for aeons. Maybe it was fated
     1 Pushkin first wrote ``imperial portraits''; but this he later altered
     {214}
     And long, as if through mists that spurted,
     and useful goods of every kind.
     {165}
     perhaps no more sensations lumbered
     a hundred times afresh distorted;
     For what charade is he apparelled?
     forests where my young age was passed
     ``Poor Yorick,'' said he, broken-hearted:
     you kept your friendship with our friend:
     perhaps her love could in the end
     perplexed... and rooted to the ground.
     pursuits of a monotonous breed
     of ruts that grace our fatherland.
     he'd sack the Muses and get wedded;
     on which a carpet has been spread,
     it was that he'd been truly stirred,
     a stanza villainously padded.
     Goodbye, for now we make an end.
     Poor Lensky! where the tomb is bounded
     on Olga; from heart's ache still spared,
     a bit provincial and affected,
     past all endurance. You're referred
     quite self-absorbed and unaffected
     {145}
     rewards the music of your mind
     foes, friends and loves, their voice is stilled.
     {105}
     {147}
     reader, you ask, and I'll expound --
     Russian pancakes were always served;
     {149}
     {77}
     reverie hounds you, and you find
     a Lancer wooed and won her hand,
     for hours alone; she walked and walked...
     in these last years all mixed and fluttered.
     I don't know why, but for my friend
     fever of rhyme: thereby he's doubled
     for whom her passion has been planned
     and put a cross-sign on the maid.
     his nature would be changed and steadied,
     from all the world, they sat and pored
     his transports, and the marriage-bed
     for his old courses to be changed.
     a park, enormous and neglected,
     others will follow where they tread...
     you left no steps that could be tracked:
     and there a tombstone says its word
     as something not to be declared,
     from Million Street16 came floating round;
     reader, or where you've shone and glittered!
     Olga is there, he sees her stand
     a treasure never to be shared.
     Reader, I wish that, as we parted --
     for quite a while by fortune's hand.
     and, hands a-tremble, Nyanya prayed
     interior décor in the end
     and glad he was he'd thus arranged
     for Tanya, winter's ways are dread.
     in warmer airs was half dispersed.
     first snow for shoulders, breast and head:
     Eugene would willingly have started
     rapture was just two weeks ahead;
     whom thirty centuries have adored!
     He drained his glass down to the end
     regard, and slipped away for good, ...
     Outside the gate Tatyana parted
     Whenever nyanya had collected
     Since earliest boyhood he had doted
     slumber still floats above his head.
     sometimes, in reverie's sacred land,
     Eugene attends the boulevard,
     in deep anxiety of mind.
     she fell in love -- the hour was fated...
     So there she stood, forlorn, deserted!
     with whom your thoughts are so obsessed --
     With reason, too: for when he'd vetted
     in untold beauty close at hand.
     he's left sad footprints on the ground.
     Eugene turned countryman. He tasted
     Sometimes a landscape's represented,
     was the first thing that Olga said.
     spread out its shadow all around --
     same Pom, same husband to the end;
     in friendly gatherings where I read,
     still has Monsieur Finemouche for friend,
     its nullity I've always hated,
     I feel a small foot in my hand;
     or worse, to a soirée. Unheard
     if I, like you, had been a bard.
     however much her soul has faltered,
     enormous bear; Tatyana yelled,
     which held him silently subjected,
     struck down as if she'd been accused,
     your presence aches, and in my blood!
     emotion, thought, and magic sound;
     High ceilings everywhere abounded;
     expecting winter, nature waited --
     with thoughts of him in ceaseless round.
     She hates a friendly voice's sound,
     Wildly the fearful laughter pealed;
     I leave the verdict in your hand.
     ``Whither, oh whither are ye banished,
     Once home, he brought out and inspected
     her manner is no less contained;
     Eugene, at Olga's side, was racked
     Agree, the way Eugene proceeded
     Evgeny echoed him: ``My second?
     had with its brilliant mantle crowned --
     Eugene, with solemn face, paid heed,
     Was she the Tanya he'd exhorted
     whispered by heart a note addressed
     with Eugene frozen where he stood.
     her bow, as calm and as restrained.
     with amber pipes from Tsaregrad;12
     as much as in Moscow the proud.
     with tenderness he'd watched and noted
     and happy licence are allowed,
     in sultry sleep, in lonely bed,
     Still in the porch, exhausted-stupid,
     with tufts of snow; and through the lifted
     she'd never join the game selected,
     in fashion that's half-glad, half-anguished:
     Yet -- fear itself she found presented
     Still tumbling, devil, snake and Cupid
     {132}
     each grips his pistol in his hand.
     {206}
     his choice could shock or might offend;
     it stirs her drooping soul to bound
     stood thunder-struck. In what wild round
     with a consumption, they've relied.
     of leaves that autumn killed for good,
     in darkness in her room, or treated
     some regimental bard has added
     with a first click, the catch is tried.
     he's put belle Tatiana instead.
     I'm sick, my dear, I'm sick indeed.
     So my Zaretsky, as I said,
     she doesn't see, or doesn't mind;
     stumblingly call to mind he did
     Evgeny looks at Lensky, chilled
     He's here -- Monsieur Guillot, my friend.
     Should your perfections be expended
     was by forebodings much oppressed.
     ``some are far distant, some are dead''.
     He was sweet-natured, and yet wild.
     his tale of youthful love, narrated
     and dead ideas from that old hoard,
     His father died; and (as expected)
     he hears a voice; ``well, what? he's killed!''
     Suddenly, from a crest, she sighted
     hymnal as, endlessly unfurled,
     of swaddling clothes -- already blighted!
     amongst the crafty and small-minded,
     in any picture of this kind:
     someone towards whose heart and mind
     And suddenly her radiance lighted
     ditty of our secret world,
     was that calm brow of one who swooned.
     Where to, God knows. The trail is dead.
     where admonitions are pronounced,
     where nowadays I'm soundly trounced,
     Winter!... The countryman, enchanted,
     debauchery was praised, and studied
     now, by green tablecloths awaited,
     She was like him and always sported
     However closely he inspected,
     with our poor girl was kind and good;
     he's racing millward like a bird.
     whose heart experience has cooled
     I really dote upon the word:
some of his verses to him. The stanza was unfinished.
     among my friends, in all that crowd
     she sighed, and in a trance coopted
     had drawn Eugene's especial heed
     already stirred him as they should.
     your advent swamps me in its flood!
     whoever you may be, a friend,
     he found all kinds of brickbat hurled.
     she grew accustomed, and contented.
     deep in Moldavia the abhorred,
     She entered the deserted yard.
     ``Well, what?'' the neighbour says, ``he's killed.''
     with recent fortune, vainly waited
     (as I've so oft in jest related)?
     We each have enemies in this world,
     would have been all that we required!
     I know, Godsent one, I'm protected
     in deepest thought at the chess-board
     Where is the fire that once ignited,
     assembly, silent and dejected?
     hymns of the ages never sound.
     as infant sleep, or the unaffected
     Here stands, with shady park surrounded,
     she's their great friend, asked in, caressed,
     suggests a victim richly decked...
     and kept quite silent while she read.
     don't let me stray in paths unplanned.''
     will reach, and past the tomb's compound
     ditties of our secret world,
     sweet words by which her pain was banned --
     Seeing Vladimir had defected,
     she sat there; through her teeth a word
     Still on the board, the beakers hissed,
     {133}
     now warmth and blossom are on hand,
     which Ovid sang, for which the bard,
     she brought her talents, never ceased,
     no, even her eyebrow never quivered,
     not for the first time he succeeded
     we weep for the young lover's end,
     while, marmot-like, he hibernated --
     and what came out? a hairy, tumbled,
     instead the chance to get acquainted
     she guards, in silence and for good,
     when, on the plain, green herbs are massed,
     her girlhood games; in them he'd shared,
     as if some goal had been achieved.
     she sang of childhood's fun, indited
     while a mazurka holds the crowd;
     of trumpet, dagger, mask and sword,
     at twenty, was a fop inbred,
     at thirty, lucratively wed;
     and doctors, he'd have died in bed.
     down from his Kalmuck steed he rolled
     she lacked her sister's beauty, lacked
     you in my arms on gingerbread?''
     spying my features, as he could,
     with fire from every cross of gold.
     in quilted dressing-gown adorned,
     in darkest forest depths and drowned
     and in the country, blissful, horned,
     with charming forefinger she traced
     her way; she passed, then as she walked
     Now for the first time she's escorted
     sweet old tradition was preserved:
     Who in that flash could not have reckoned
     Who in the princess for that second
     close as a shadow on the ground;
     singing in chorus as directed
     his mind's eye focused on the hinted
     and where most surely notes are sped.
     you see your fated tempter stand.
     words mispronounced, thoughts ill-expressed
     after the martyr's price it paid,
     could it be she, who just had turned
     could it be she... or had he dreamed?
     he watched the guests and, as he dined,
     which smilingly your friend, supported
     hear my confession as I stand
     with storm and tumult in his head,
     can disavow that. I have read
     If suddenly aloft she spied
     not the plain, timorous, dejected
     his heart was plunged! A sudden sound,
     while she's from top to toe surveyed;
     on Eugene, he was deeply stirred:
     can yet keep nail-care much in mind:
     custom is despot of mankind.
     and everything is cramped and loud;
     He sang of love, to love subjected,
     he fell in love with darkest wildwood,
     among the guests she recognized
     condemned to a lifetime of hard,
     is in your poetry enshrined?''
     sadly he mourned for the departed.
     can it be true, and firmly stated
     ``OE'' devotedly inlaced.
     she stopped at the loud torrent's bound,
     now Lovelace's renown has faded
     he almost lost his mind, expired,
     caricatured them in his mind.
     and saved from being charmed or fooled!
     cold, pure as ice, and as unkind,
     where two old pinetrees stand united:
     came out so soft, it scarce was heard.
     His hair was fashionably curled,
     was quite beyond his wit, we found.
     commands our rhymester-brotherhood:
     no one was ever so engrossed:
     and always the inspired regard --
     So glut yourselves until you're sated
     how many follies were engendered;
     the ballroom drove me off my head:
     No, she's already pledged her word
     6 These lines and the first twelve lines of stanza XLVII were discarded
     what was it in your heart it found
     was the sad poet not confounded
     his acts and words to suit our end?
     conclude that it's high time she wed!...
     the poet struck down by his friend!
     you know I'm hard to comprehend...
     with Tolstoy's2 brush, or decorated
     Napoleon here, intoxicated
     touches obliquely, but with speed,
     Boston and ombre for the old,
     his bow was wholly unaffected.
     that on the world's staircase there waited
     the downy woods are greener-tinted;
     and blood had bubbled as it flowed;
     and hope and passion; life had glowed
     in which so lately it abounded
     on dining-chairs are all prostrated;
     with puzzled and confused regard...
     nor his,2 who sings of Finland's maid.
     the vales dry out, grow brightly printed;
     I'll make them spar another round,
     the noise their rustic wheels projected --
     a flood on which no frosty band
     In French Onegin had perfected
     The horses, as they sense the dead,
     where scribbling friends have interjected
     Between the lines of text as printed,
     by nature, contradiction's friend.
     But you, blest husbands, to the end
     and glittering whiteness all around.
     No path to see: the snow has drifted
     and the poet, without a sound,
     in terms where not a word was spared:
     he drives in brilliant sun; striated
     and Lensky, left eye closing, aimed --
     but you're not paying any heed.''
     with neighbour Lensky, the deceased.
     A thought was born, and quickly noted...
     a masculine disguise to aid
     and been as happy... as I could!
     have other maidens, since you vanished,
     as gage of all things that were good,
     Yet once for him her thoughts had whirled,
     one smoothes the pillows down in bed,
     and on their marks has made them stand;
     The lady of the house has fled.
     treaties of nations long departed,
     with pots and basins out of mind,
     the blood came smoking from the wound.
     where folded arms are tightly pressed.
     But my Eugene that night directed
     by Naiads, one foot on the ground,
     beneath it, vapour wreathed and coiled.
     Istómina,11 thronged all around
     the tolerant Evgeny heard --
     once on the highway he'd detected
     which with a blush he leaves unread.
     and nothing in her look is altered:
     have reunited friend to friend!
     The clock of doom had struck as fated;
     in due succession; hers is lifted
     the spring invites you to the land
     {131}
     no sound by which her soul is stirred.
     ``why, Olga's younger, and she's bedded.
     his nag has smelt the snow, and planted
     with balm of prayer my torn and rended
     ``But I was simply not intended
     had been imposed by winter's hand;
original  metaphor  of the deserted house, closed  inner shutters,  whitened
     But don't be cross, my darling friend,
     as at a censure that was hard.
     though there he's no more to be found,
     have clearly got the upper hand
     but suddenly a snowdrift rumbled,
     away, so cool, so unconcerned?
     with grave goodbyes to the bereaved,
     whither does all my yearning tend?
     in front of you, on every hand,
     ``Who? that fat general?'' Tanya cried.
     But who stands there, in this selected
     a single thing to her. His head
     the source's chattering voice is heard;
     jealously, shyly, I've imported
     Now, Lensky, would it be so bad
     Arrived apace, he gives the word
     the headpiece-text is thus indited --
     there was no trace to be detected
     with me to see an alien strand;
     the pensive Dryads' hiding-ground.
     her hands affectionately pressed;
(Nabokov). While still at the Lyceum in Tsarskoe Selo, in 1815, Pushkin read
     to talk to her, but language died.
     to drive the swooning senses mad;
     At last he wakes, and stirs in bed,
     helping the poor, or while I mended
     the crown of marriage was projected
     {180}
     before a cold, indifferent crowd,
     {38}
     to which so oft we've dedicated
     by dreary snowdrifts piled around;
     the trail the youthful poet followed
     no dream. You'd scarce arrived, I reckoned
     just as she'd always been, she tripped
     vanishes with his load of dread.
     acute and subtle -- in a word
     the girl he'd scorned in what he deemed
     just like, on turf, your fleeting tread.
     take any novel, clearly traced
     knowing the offender, he'd been frightened
     all that today we find absurd.
     both hearts to blaze had now expired;
     the lucky bard, and as he dozed
     the earth for him grew dumb and closed?...
     He's always with her: either seated
     but no, my Moscow never stumbled
     before their eyes they see unfold
     his awkwardness, he's hardly said
     in grief that nothing else could mend;
     until the grave by your strong hand:
     under the table's linen shield,
     Unforced, as conversation passed,
     out of the hand of that same bard:
     and soon will day's bright tune be played;
     to meet the unhappy poet, skipped
     but soon the ways we trod were parted
     before Onegin there collected
     beneath a shroud that's all dishevelled;
     Lensky has watched: his rage has blazed,
     But that's enough. At once, in stead,
     at noontime does his horn resound
     his tea with rum quite left behind,
     the needle, never had she lingered
     The jealous poet's gloom is lightened!
     as it assembles them around;
     Tatyana went with them, and sped
     unfathomable to the mind;
     the carriage of the newly-wed.
     beside the window-sill, that bed
unfinished.
     Her eyes were opened, and she said
     and for belle Nina, as it read,
     below the others who have signed
     below a hill; a garden stood
     Beyond the stream there smoked and stirred
     The happiness of youth is dead,
     by now his bride-to-be has wed
     unloved, and friendless, and estranged.
     lawgiver to the modish world?
     undressed, by candlelight selected
     beyond the grave we all must build --
     no notice of them. But I've chattered
     by nervous hands of a schoolmaid:
     loved someone else, not her intended,
     by the new whisper in the wood?
     this Grandison of hers was splendid,
     There was a period when cold-blooded
     in quiet flood. A beetle whirred.
     their masters' berries undetected
     Now nearer... hooves... and in the yard
     Onegin's waiting on the ground.''
     bidding us to reject for good
     Lel6 floats about above her head;
     the samovar of evening boiled,
     Tatyana lowered her regard
     anticipates a swim, in stead
     Lensky of course was quite untainted
     then, stepping nearer, Eugene said:
     both dull and ludicrous, the bunded
     {203}
     by pain and languishment; she craved
     4  This Russianized version of  the Greek Agatho  is  ``elephantine and
     but Olga would have never read!
     and those we sing for will be paid
     and silently he hung his head.
     the pangs with which his heart was troubled,
     to blow his brains out, but in stead
     to life grew colder than the dead.
     He thought that Olga'd be confused,
     times were when I was sharp and bold:
     and my whole life has been directed
     Her tender touch had never fingered
     and pale, and fade without a word!
     < ...
     ... >2
     and tears were drowning her regard.
     But I myself read my bedizened
     that not a syllable be uttered
     In the two sisters' rooms extended,
     A sudden clatter!... blood was curdled...
     to wiser words and deeds, and learned
     to my young days, it's time I turned
     {221}
     Lensky rejoiced. His designated
     in tears and violent tossing vented
     an offering ready for the ground.
     if you'd still been with me, dear friend,
     love's crown, delectable, awaited
     Between them, every topic started
     that table where the lamp has languished,
     but scarcely understood a word.
     But it was passion that preempted
     there's not a word she's understood;
     a corpse on boards was all he found,
     but just then Eugene's pistol flamed...
     on jam, and speeches in regard
     at any time he'd be prepared.
     by all is sweetly mutilated,
     long, lively tales from wonderland,
     they rise and ripen and fall dead:
     on the dull life that bachelors lead;
     The aunts exchanged a look, they fluttered,
     they nudged Tatyana, and each muttered
     they've moved around and been reseated;
     the eager players are enrolled --
     {58}
     Like convicts in a dream released
     the strophe over which I slaved;
     let fall his pistol on the ground.
     to know you, swooned, and in a second
     by deep and shady woods protected;
     they find her somewhat unexpected,
     the time to go has long since passed
     his strangeness, wholly unaffected,
     And then she broods and mopes for good,
     by sluggish Lethe may be swallowed,
     By chance those verses haven't vanished;
     talk that might turn a young girl's head)
     before the clavichord with knitted
     His father failed to understand
     to her glass porch; pursues her round
     to rains, and flax, and the stockyard.''
     might have resounded long and loud
     my little feet, where have you vanished,
     {99}
     but for the effect that he created
     billiards are dropped, cue put to bed:
     two verses of the Aeneid.
     Lensky ingenuously related
     the crash of plates and knives is blended
     but in an earlier age retarded,
     ``Boredom, that's what so bad, my friend.''
     They buzz -- but then all talk's suspended --
     or letters in a young girl's hand.
     the ancients have gone stiff and cold,
     a hidden beauty in the end:
     the moderns rage against the old.
     and listen for the heart's first sound,
     his soul still blossomed out, and lighted
     but now grown plain and kind in stead,
     to ask of you that you transcend
     Lensky, that tragic victim, died...
     but in the old days she had heard
     before the fire a table's spread;
     and not because she'd once preferred
     of Gulnare, he would play a card
     my fate, it leads me to what end?''
     by heaven with such an unsubdued
     Tanya begins to understand
     to nobody except a wizened
     my giddy mistress made me proud.
     threw Eugene at her feet -- she stirred,
     the programme of his daily round.
     to whom your hearts are dedicated,
     but, without asking, they transported
     but at the window, in the splendid
     and trails alone around the wood.''
     he leaves a tender verse behind,
     by fresh ennui as he reflected
     more searching than Chateaubriand;
     they praise the Father of the world.
     he found too much that he regretted:
     To harmless idleness devoted,
     her feelings were far more inclined --
     Buyánov's heels have split the wood
     Bordeaux, you're like a faithful friend,
     of calculated slander should,
     Meanwhile with pain her soul was girdled,
     ``My sweet, my dearest heart, I'm old,
     and Flyánov, amply lubricated,
     By now whist's heroes have completed
     monsters the maiden stood revealed.
     begot by boredom out of greed.
     the letter from Tatyana's hand:
     always comes back: I'll not be wedded.
     the murmur where the streamlet played...
     to the princess, in his weak hand,
     the horrid nightmare must portend
     and heartless pleasure was up-graded;
     to save the honour of our land
     to Eugene's letter, word for word.
     and give her comfort to the end:
     He was too young to have been blighted
     tries out the ice with cautious tread,
     His wife, just like Tatyana, had
     till then had been dispersed and wasted --
     he's dreadfully dissatisfied;
     the thought sank in, and penetrated:
     that she's so trustful, and imbued
     Tatyana simply lay in bed,
     the draught whose blessings are agreed,
     and whist, that's now so keenly fêted --
     and took a mortgage on his land.
     and looked at him without a word,
     the impatient conqueror was humbled!
     to eat and drink, then separated
     Thronged by adorers, I've detected
     they buried Uncle, congregated
     Martin Zadéka fails to mend;
     of entertaining the half-dead:
     Tanya's no longer quite so frightened
     and also prettier, I'll be bound,
     the man she feared and idolized --
     you're really going? Well, I'm sad.
     My goddesses! Where are you banished?
     he's lost his self-command, and crazed
     your Zeus, your Cypris, your whole band
     as yours did, Homer, godlike lord,
     to the hero that she'd adopted.
     the bank, the immobile stream are levelled
     midst crones with endless tears to shed,
     had made his name, when, bold as bold,
     Tatyana watched the moon, and floated
     the grey-haired nurse with kerchiefed head;
     Melpomene wails long and loud,
     the silence when our talk had ceased!
     and although Troy's greybeards, collected
     he's host, that's obvious. Thus enlightened
     around Priam the much-respected,
     He was no fool; appreciated
     That year the season was belated
     at least her tone is sometimes found
     of secret pain... but it's now rated
     on springtime grasses of the field,
     and wrecked the flooring-boards for good;
     is in voluptuous languor dressed,
     to see my kin, and in the end
     how long is it?'' ``And since I fed
     ``All right, I'll come then...'' ``What a friend!''
means of  which Pushkin mimics  poor Lensky's own style... but  the rich and
     the bear -- what next? -- behind her stalked.
     Her father, kindly, well-regarded,
     The tomcat, mannered and affected,
     and the churchyard where, new-erected,
     that sat above the stove and purred
     that visitors must be expected.
     he sends, a second, then a third.
     the bear let out a roar, and held
     approaches Olga; Lensky's signed
     more tender than it used to sound.
     and washed its face, to her brought word
     then to the altar, to be crowned.
     and now at last he saw the World.
     hold half the world still unreleased,
     honest devotion to the good,
     has something low and unrefined.
     How could she? why, he'd never heard...
     Tanya's undressed, and lies in bed.
     a foe -- our mood should be warm-hearted.
     a true companion to the end,
     of mind got clarity new-found;
     my father blessed me. So I'd spend
     that poison brew; and in your mind
     he leaves the house, calls for his horse
     Tatyana's rites are not for me.
     in deepest grasses, quite alone,
     has made the park her brooding-place,
     Tatyana in low-cut attire
     and I'll be true to him, for life.''
     may then amuse my glad decline.
     the heavenly lights in glorious quire
     has found a port for his old age,
     a vivid brush, a witty rattle --
     they heap up silver with a spade;
     the girls sing out the ancient rhyme:
     to cool my glances and my tongue,
     too faint to stir a further pace:
           Malfilâtre
     and portents of the lunar phase.
     more joy still when with mute insistence
     Tatyana groaned above the tide;
     to help her from the other side;
     and frames would shudder, windows tremble;
     the strain of Tasso's octave-rhyme!
     then afterwards, alone, at ease,
     ages we'd never heard of love:
     and for a chuckle or a smile.
     the usurers' voracious tribe.
     a tempting plume for you to take?
     and so in the salons could make
     and wore his dressing-gown to dine.
     to do them all is easy game.
     To private tastes we each subscribe:
     A sorry state of things, it's true!
     the idol that she'll most admire
     already studying to intrigue,
     his converse gave Onegin pleasure;
     to wreck a maiden's sleep with fable,
     the bear explains: ``my cousin's here --
     moment the assembly seemed to shake...
     then he began to talk once more
     here a weak version, incomplete,
     the full fruit of her heart's desire;
     already high in treason's league!
     mountains are piled on every carriage,
     Tatyana, lonely heroine,
     the youth of those past days in line
     across the years to our own time.
     my declaration may give rise!
     him prove it, writing after me.''
     there gathered at the coffin-side
     to bellow out: ``she's mine, she's mine.''
     and glumly serves the medicine bottle,
     my word; no welshing, as I live. >
     6 Admiral Alexander Shishkov (1754-1841)  championed the purity ot  the
     that I prefer to Champagne's tide;
     as love's technique, when it would blare
     that your proud glance is sure to take!
     And the sly baseness, fit to throttle,
     Moscow has beauties and to spare:
     Monsieur l'Abbé, the mediocre,
     and all into the salon squeeze,
     they don't deserve what they inspire
     they'd settled that some years before.
     to Moscow settled in a trice.
     the pillars of the turnpike-gate;
     their joyous way across the ice;
     his gaze at Tatyana alone --
     my house, my evenings, all that state --
     apartment where a double glaze
     There's vacancies in plenty there.''
     as scarlet heels have lost their name
     the coolness of the sombre glade,
     a place for rest. Eugene alone
     arrives, the girl's exhausted gaze,
     and stately periwigs, their fame.
     more thoroughly, thank God, the creature
     he's moved... you see him from the side.''
     The hall is full of noise and hustle,
     there's yap of pugs, and laughs, and bustle;
     a slipper, or a magazine?
     the country's pretty stupid here!
     ``Abandon hope for evermore.''9
     The fields are dark, since evening came.
     moved and surprised, she stays serene,
     as in the nook he'd sit alone
     ``Tanya's no child -- it's past a joke,''
     misunderstanding, noise, and blame!
     at first, with God knows whom to see,
     maid-servants from the whole estate
     by sighs of passion or by praise.
     the hall's without a living creature,
     beneath the stone reposes here,
     ``But there'll be such a rout and scrabble
     there waited for us both the malice
     But in misfortune or displeasure,
     the season which is such a bore --
     the murmuring Nereids recite,
     The bitterness was mine -- the ice
     the Major's here: he's all the rage
     more and more brightly still they blaze.
     the days grew shorter, in the glade
     the grand monde finds it out of place.
     here's boredom, madness or pretence,
     men made their bows, and sought her eye;
     am doomed to perish, yet to die
     the men confront them, face to face:
     here there's no conscience, here no sense;
     tranquillity, and solitude --
     And if she happened anywhere
     my tedious taste for feeling free.
     they sit, they cross themselves for grace.
     to meet his thirsty lips... What daze,
     leave far behind that city-gate.
     then quietly at last says she:
     light dreams for new ones... so we see
     let's go where, winding all the time
     and taken by the French -- some prize! --
     that stretched from Romulus in his prime
     the entire story of your fate.
     and all the works of Fontanelle16 --
     and put them on a paced-out site.
     to know the audience hears his voice.
     that king of the satiric scene,
     that I'm just longing to indite --
     to me her best in-quarto tome,
     broke greetings off, and gave Eugene
     as was the old suspicious sage,
     his Sunday game of cards with me.
     to speak; believe me: of my shame
     to wreak, by stirring Lensky's ire,
     the best revenge one could desire.
     that soul without a moral tie,
     always contented with his life,
     that moment, of a luscious pie
     and lives, a veritable sage,
     boy-tribes with skates on loudly slice
     Louder and louder sounds the wrangle:
     the charge that poets are unable
     but now it bores me every minute.
     to all that's trivial and inane?
     have each asked him to a soirée:
     Tanya thanks each one with a phrase.
     to come back to the hall alone
     my husband for his wounds in battle
     Tanya is gripped. No comment's made
     the climacteric of our life,
     beloved friend, thou art my bride!''
     the peaceful Muses' devotee,
     and with his dinner, and his wife.
     and I surrender to my fate.''
     too pale, too thin, but on the whole
     no boy, to fight or take offence --
     there was a softness in his glance:
     the glare, the fumes in which I live,
     not even in her earliest age;
     barrels, and then to drive aside
     by two small oaktrees in a ride.
     the inmost thoughts that girls can hide.
     that there be just one voice which came,
     this very day I'd gladly give,
     taken your place, though not your throne?
     his children and his faithful wife,
     like fields in spring when storms arrive.
     But now, in this vindictive pleasure
     the iron figure3 on the table,
     become a joke to us, its game,
     long, long ago... no, that could be
     though Menelaus, in Helen's name,
     Then in return for all this twaddle,
     advises him of dinner-time.
     the hapless Phrygians all the same,
     to life and hope with just a glance --
     to be respected all through life:
     to ensure that till next time our image
     that in the usual Christmas scrimmage
     and wasted life's fine flower meanwhile.
     there'll be a fight. For that I give
     And then, to part us in full measure,
     the highest circles are a bore.
     that nubile maid of riper age,
     bewitches Tanya... he is able
     by calmly aiming at his pate
     to where he came to her that time
     together they arrived, and none
        Notes to Chapter One
     has hardly mastered postal prose.
     to his mysterious tree the snake
     his mind, so cold and so precise.
     it's also true, in battle's rapture,
     Now that the British Muse is able
     they needed kvas like air; at table
     {57}
     and set on hating the coquette,
     like a true friend, to speak my name.
     beneath, a brook rolls its tribute
     and at the very self-same time
     {62}
     is out of fashion in our time.
     the deeper in the wood, the more
     long since unstirred by praise and fame
     now she's bereft, and just the same
     The evening passes, and meanwhile
     then suddenly she's off, and there
     the toll of those borne off by fate!
     but in his songs kept pride of place
     then I'd have looked for you alone
     the secret of her husband's measure,
     I own it: tender Parny's12 rhyme
     through baseness of the soul that he,
     how well she'd studied her new role!
     ``Today he promised he'd be here,''
     ``The house, the park... I'll go and see!''
     by the cold world's corrupt finesse;
     took her to his estate, where she,
     Tatyana breathed on the cold pane,
     the allée to the lake, the copse;
     the fleeting tenderness that stole
     that thievish mouths cannot consume
     He was convinced, a kindred creature
     That's when I'll sit down to compose
     He goes inside, corpse-like of feature...
     to the circle of our dance.
translated only the first part of the famous verse.'' Pushkin's note.
     the war, the snowfall, and his wife.
     but madrigals I've got to write!
     the new moon, horned, on her left side,
     the lies that in the press run rife,
     the circumstances of his capture
     to drain, on credit, bottles three.
     befitting such a noble pile:
     by moonlight two young girls took pleasure,
     The censor's tribute, I'll arrange:
     to gentlemen on every side
     a novel graced with such a name.
     unnoticed, in unseeing style,
     to crack between them; for a while
     the faces met with everywhere;
     the morning after, a surprise
     and yawn in silence at the stage
     but I refuse to chop or change.
     as I recall a bygone age?
     and opened Schiller... but the embrace
     lend ears to my lugubrious tone:
     until Bréguet's unsleeping chime
     beside unfinished lines, a suite
     that, though polite, was clear as ice.
     new depths of boredom.'' ``No, the same.
     looks at him with a steady gaze,
     a passer-by; and on tiptoe
     Tatyana had no dolls to dandle,
     but then she found their choice was strange.
     the man of honour and of sense.
     True, scorn should punish and should bridle
     Tanya pursued them with her gaze...
     he even dares, once in a while,
     to pranks and jokes of earlier date.
     bestirred himself, was devilish active!
     unspeaking, too, but stretched out there
     lest in forgetfulness complete
     looked down in an access of hate,
     lively, capricious, and inane...
     up the hillside at breakneck pace;
     But ours, whatever he might be,
     left her to follow her own line,
     Let others learn from his example!
     unhesitating from her tongue,
     and in the bath-house had a table
     their unattractive tête-à-tête;
     until this day, a lady's love
     love's melting dreams shall fill my rhyme,
     the horses fidget worse and worse;
     vexation? vainness? heavens above,
     torment of pride? And why's he come?
     by flickering past us like a fence.
     He destined Olga's hand for me,
     {87}
     {202}
     in her once more has come alive.
     the coachmen ring the fire, and curse
     1 Vasily Levshin (1746-1826), writer on gardening and agriculture.
     {134}
     bear's gone; a hallway, no mistake;
     now dazzled by one thing's effulgence,
     {109}
     kept asking: "shall I live to see"...''
     his soul to a delicious rapture
     just like a shadow, or a wife.
     The place where Eugene loathed his leisure
     Vladimir Lensky. Quick, let's dine!
     just now of wrestling with his shade,
     nothing you did gave cause for blame:
     value the hero of my tale,
     Just let yourself be your whole care,
     and in her unconsidered note
     there any friend of harmless pleasure
     thinking: he loved me, and in strife
     the sad beginnings of his life
     to the first meanings of his flute.
     not cold, but also not effusive,
     {181}
     a grey-haired, perfumed exquisite,
     a girl or two, without a smile
     this soul that glowed with virgin fire.
     {208}
     time was, in evening hours of leisure,
     that with him to the trysting-place
     at such vivacious, free good sense.
     and no one's ear could take offence
     Horses and coach are spliced in marriage;
     {157}
     In winter, when for longer time
     just at this crisis of his gale,
     ``This is Vladimir Lensky's grave
     but, nurse, you see... Oh, don't refuse...''
     her youth with all his repertoire
     and obstinate his look. But she
     breakneck by moonlight at my side!
     whom shall we never find a bore?
     jealousy's flame, to light desire;
     bigot or prude? or has he quite
     bursts with cold envy and with bile?
     amazement: ``Where's your second gone?''
     in a melodious, flute-like tone.
     across the Baltic in exchange
     their table, and their hours of leisure?
     their hands are dipped in scarlet gore,
     thumps as the balls are pressed inside
     all this, at eighteen years of age,
     and felt himself love's invalide.
     where her security's complete.
     Without romance, or false insistence,
     bright Northern Cleopatra she:
     but you'll undoubtedly agree
     to aim, at steady, even pace
     ``But tell me who she is.'' ``My wife.''
     two cupboards, one divan, a table,
     where Tanya now confronts Eugene.
     Now hear the friends in dialogue:
     But to the garden, to the scene
     I'm terrified -- so let it be...
     What trifling could be more complete?
     were all the law that I would use;
     to heart. And in his misted gaze
     and dinner with a touch of idle
     the youthful votary of rhyme
     a steed responsive to the bridle,
     and part in kindness? Just the same,
     to pass the time was Eugene's theme:
     all modish foes dread worldly shame.
     have vanished, like an empty noise,
     A man who's active and incisive
     but youthful, virgin hearts derive
     when shall I start on my escape?
     into the allée, face to face,
     that marble Nina's proved unable
     to institute a new regime.
     to hear what latest modes require,
     as helpmeet in my sad existence,
     to infuriate a clumsy foe;
     becomes a horse for all to see;
     ambassador?'' In some surprise
     And every minute his lorgnette
     that even so my wretched style
     {222}
     and hate with malice; he whose life
     to fashion's absolute dictate,
     a pretty girl exactly like
     would cause widespread remark and tattle,
     No doubt about it, it's Eugene.
     ``But so it is: I'm in no state
     I need to rest from all this rhyme:
     bored by success' giddy trifle,
     ``where master used to sit alone.
     three pairs of handsome ones -- yet there
     who can combine it with the free
     has fixed on her a steady gaze.
     has kept him warm in chimney's blaze
     a block of snow will slip and tumble.
     the units are ourselves alone.
     by blazing fireplace, and intone
        ... ...
     the horror of disgrace and crime,
     ``How long has he been on the scene?
     a flimsy bridge whose every quake
     already tends too much to smile
     a vulgar touch. I can't translate.
     but I've become another's wife --
     But from the hero of my tale,
          Nasce una gente a cui 'l morir non dole.
     his pistols, laid them in their case,
     ``who loves you more than I, let's see
     they took offence at this, and broke
     while men, all sombre, all the same,
     nothing more lovable than he.
     the sky is brilliant in its blue
note.
     But God, how deadly dull to sample
     which I myself won't praise or blame
     Who is there who will truly measure
     his virulence that made you smile,
     as did the general at her side.
     1 ``Written in Bessarabia.'' Pushkin's note.
        Notes to Chapter Five
Chapter One
     4 ``Well-known restaurateur.'' Pushkin's note.
     that all of Russia can't contribute
     Was it for you that I became
     his epigrams topped up with bile.
crowd.'' Pushkin's note.
     is all those stubborn lips desire!
     17 ``Written at Odessa.'' Pushkin's note.
     that mediocre dress alone
     How early he'd learnt to dissemble,
     coated with a thin layer of spite.
     and every night shares her repose.
     The ploughman there delights to doze,
     her eyes are lowered, but ablaze,
     Whom then to credit? Whom to treasure?
     cooked-up where garret-vermin babble,
     come in and warm yourself a minute!''
     the solitude of woods and tillage,
     now sensitive, and now carefree,
     12 Constantinople.
     Clarissa, Julie, or Delphine6 --
     though some support it with good grace).
     the leather rein, to learn the tale,
     the simple legend -- then a haze
     how sad the scar of passion's knife:
Chapter Five
     that's the morass, I beg you note,
     what wings our first successes gave!
--------
     closely embraced, in wending here,
           Horace
     come to the fields, my friends! To horse!
     Now, to my cost it may be true
--------
     that fired his soul, to burn the same;
     the fools who sparkle far and wide,6
     that, meanwhile, pinched and glum of feature,
     consequences of hideous woe;
     Thank you for all the gifts I treasure,
     thank you for sorrow and for pleasure,
     caressing breath has fanned my face
     < that there existed, for the indulgence
     and ease his catch with all due care.
     not only by Evgeny's eye;
     a grammar, a digest of fable,
     I'll end my tale some other time.
     sooner or later will relate
     with any torture so exquisite
     will disappear as fast as smoke:
     4 See note 1 to Chapter Five.
     ``Command me, darling, as you choose.''
     sigh, and stood up, began to pace;
     It's time to drop astern the shape
     had ruled out reading, in their place
     Shall I depict with expert knowledge
     self-willed it may be just the same;
     who early died as die the brave'' --
     nor crawled in suppliant attire.
     with heart that's grown unused to praise,
     a restless urge for change of place
     with years no more to meet our gaze?
Chapter Three
     when in the park, in the allée
     No tearstains, nothing. Wrath alone
     is graven on that face of stone.
     Can it be true, it won't come twice --
     with all our hearts, and who require
     Such feckless passion -- as I live,
     I kept in mind an ancient store
     No feast, no welcome-gifts -- with fire
     sets out upon her homeward course;
     a rambling walk beside my lake,
     smiles, and a maiden's tranquil poise,
     we have to cherish and admire
     in secret judgement what he'd done,
     and in a corner make him choke
     no brilliant truth, no vivid scene;
     I introduced my saucy Muse
     and with no post, no work, no wife,
     could I accept for just a minute
     2 Heroine of Zhukovsky's poem of the same name.
     his song was limpid in its tune
     ``Sit down! how strange! it's like the stage
     in ink with colour-wash above;
     where civil treacheries are rife,
     who never learnt how dreamers babble;
     self-portraits only -- furthermore
     could they not laugh out loud, before
     now things are changed, now we resemble
     conversing in a singsong voice;
     who never scorned the social rabble;
     its own perfection everywhere,
     3 See Chapter Three, note 13.
     I do, I do. Well, where's he gone?''
     solemn, too long compelled to throttle
     who all his life would garner praise
     she speeds her footsteps to a race,
     not even by chance, once in a while,
     whose heart on dreams was wont to thrive,
     compact of amorous trash, and worse,
     is either the distrait Vampire,
     would be allied to him by fate;
     with irresistible refulgence,
     no paradise can stay serene.
     coquettishness has got no trace --
     Hm, hm. Distinguished reader, tell me
     she can't escape at any pace --
     with cause that I've recalled them here.
     Deserving object: there can be
     nothing could alter or could tire
     no noise of gaiety, no time
     we were swept off, in reverie's haze,
     summits of aspen, birch and lime,
     show me the sense. Divine decree
     with The Well-Meaner10 on her knee?
     no matter: hope, in child's disguise,
     dumb I must perish, and alone.
     He saw the sad girl's trembling state,
     doubts, to exhaust the heart, then fire
     what can one do? as said above,
     scarce out of bibs, already fickle,
     such good and sensible advice;
     no beauties of a foreign clime,
     when suddenly I saw this treasure
     she was unhurried, unobtrusive,
     he knew too well that sort of scene.
     when not quite eighteen years of age.
     him far enough through wild and waste.
     she won't inhale the powdered rime,
     Spoilt by the habit of indulgence,
     where he was master of his college,
     so, cursing women's devious course,
     homestead, before her parents' gaze,
     I love you (what's the use to hide
     stood in the door, cherubic, mute,
     swam on the river's dreaming face,
     its winds had blown him far off course.
     when galloping at headlong pace
     where every day a bloodstained shade
     alone across the fields of space,
     I hear you say. But can you see
     6 Slavonic god of love.
     I was just thirteen years of age.
     did any glasses seek her face,
     Now here's a letter, as you see,
     At least I'll give him some advice:
     no longer does the herdsman chase
     with the grand general in her wake --
     a patriot, a cosmopolite,
     and where's her sister now? and where,
     she found, in labours and in leisure,
     and yet by Vergil or Racine
     with three roan horses in a line
     and not a mention of my name...''
     with Eugene proved a tempting prize.
     where are the reveries this time,
     where's the high aim, the ardent sense
     dreamt of reproving what they'd done:
     still filled with Eugene, Tanya wrote,
     All who behold him find him strange.
     down slopes of mountains, when a blaze
     its image, then to swoon before
     scarcely recalled their love, their spite;
     with every different kind of rabble...''
     dons of Epicurean rule,
        Notes to Chapter Three
     and I'll be thirty in a trice?
     his French valet, Guillot, is there
     death on his brow, your friend should lie,
     and theirs was the poetic flame
     she sits down calmly on one side,
     in rural calm's most secret place!
     will the benighted reason smile,
     drew scrutiny no less complete --
     he has to bring the battle-case.
     and manners of an earlier time.
     was his absorption in their sense.
     such frank tendresse; away they stole
     {108}
     dogged by one feeling, only one --
     as he descended to the grave.
     sang for the guests above the wine;
     secret sledge-rides in verse of fire;
     She sits with Nina8 at a table --
     whisper repeated to the crone.
     he'd pop the poison in his chalice!
     8 August Lafontaine (1758-1851), German novelist of family life.
     daytimes and evenings passed alone?
     shutters are up, and all is pale
     it touched with reverie her leisure,
     < amongst the soulless men of pride,
     was younger still, but at that stage
     (if you'll turn back to chapter one)
     I could describe here his attire;
     with the pink glow the snows assume
     inside the Larins' house fell mute.
     He sang of grief and parting-time,
     ``Enough, stand up. It's now for me
     and daily scenes of modish life
     sits with Limburg's vivacious cheese
     set off the ladies like a frame.
     each springtime, on the growing tree,
     is tinsel on a life I hate;
     would on those evenings guess the fate
     When out to burst a rival's bubble,
     Sometimes his tricks would earn him trouble,
     Evgeny's total store of knowledge
     is seized by Tambov's poet-sage;
     since then my heart was wrenched aside;
     why fight what's known to be decisive?
     ``Nurse, I'm not ill; I... I'm in love.''
     exhausted and done up, I take
     what traps he'd set him, with what malice
     its natural right to rave and flare.
     Enough I've wandered in the suite
     enough of my loquacious lyre:
     Since when is this?'' ``Two years or more.''
     straightened his wig, and asked her name.
     what have your wits to do with me?
     a novel on the established line
     a carving-knife -- and in the tangle
     she calls down curses on their leisure,
     ``What of them, Tanya? I was able,
     No, never in the hottest fire
     impart such lessons as you please!
     a poet, and a Kantian sage.
     so it was not in any measure,
     Saint Petersburg's fine flower was there --
     sings as he plaits a humble shoe.
     each took four steps across the space,
     was his; we'd both drunk passion's chalice:
     were placed across the gulf to make
     Which one comes first? It's just the same
     Eugene takes Olga, and is gone;
     She folds the page, lays down the plume.,
     would launch into self-sacrifice;
     shortened, or lengthened off the page.
     had only debts on which to live.
     sits imperturbable, and free.
     ``Which neighbour, dear? My head became
     watch for your smile, and catch your gaze
     who sets me snoring then and there --
     at feasts, was strong and fancy-free?
     set to well-known children's glee:
     of its unvarnished monochrome.
     is mincing manners -- nothing more.
     each moral puts us in a doze,
     in our first ages), from no place
     earn for me the rewards of fame --
     in through the door, at swallow's pace,
     where the prize-boy of fashion's college
     of boiling youth did I desire
     how bold or bashful there, and here
     ``Who would have thought it?'' ``What an age!''
     ``I am in love; leave me alone.''
     What ails him? he's in some strange daze!
     slave of the service, was en route.
     it can't be youth's distemper -- love?
     still after many years in place.
     and he was bored with social noise;
     ``I know it all: my secret ache
     someone like you and me, just nice?
     even in our names (and how much worse
     some vote a doctor for the case,
     when we begin to talk of verse);
     endorsed by fashionable rabble,
     what it's transported to our shore
     and an insouciant lorgnette.
     is yawned away with friends and wife
     and Lensky follows her... Eugene,
     ensconced beside the window-pane.
     won't benefit these guts of mine.''
     encore Moëna,7 -- and rejoice
     in loaded carriages, migrate,
     with demoiselles of riper age;
     and magic nights. In headlong course
     and where Terpsichore alone
     since I'm a member of the same.
     emboldened by his Olga's smile,
     with young Semyónova,9 and there
     was far from happy with his role.
     an old man saw her as she came,
     with work at home; but when he'd gone,
     such crystalled scents as best are able
     and nameless rivulet, that scene
     Evgeny read the sad epistle
     he stalked the drawing-rooms, remote
     whose memory will preserve for me
     I'm much afraid that bilberry wine
     each object held a secret message
          Elle était fille, elle était amoureuse.
     with this the hero of my tale:
     I never lived or wrote for praise;
     I can see naught, as Hymen's foe,
     and stoves with tiles of various hue.
     within her bosom to abate,
     for her, no joy from winter-time,
     her journey home is overdue.
     Reflection was her friend and pleasure
     is dressed, undressed, and dressed once more?
     Was it to no effect that he,
     of plains where boredom reigns complete,
     roofs, flowerbeds, fences, all in white,
     Riding on the lugubrious prairie?
     ``réveillez-vous, belle endormie.''
     Farewell to you, my free existence!
     with mournful sound the secret shade
     for vanity, and din, and glare!...
     From hour to hour a surer capture
     recalling earlier loves, did we,
     for Satan, love's a splendid joke.
     reflection or provoked dispute:
     a brook flows through a grove of lime.
     with jealousy beyond all measure
     ranges, Lenora2-like, she'd ride
     it brought back Tanya from her trance.
     has lately wintered, just a space
     Friends, how my heart would leap with pleasure
     From here, deep-sunk in pensive woe,
     raised nose and shoulders high and wide
     rings proudly in that sombre name.
results. See note 2 to Chapter Three.
     right in the flower of joyous hope,
     and cattle roamed the plain, and here
     far from it! just one more collapse.''
     all point at her, and all combine
     {88}
     {159}
     for hours, with elbows on the table --
     from her they strive to coax and coddle
     {110}
     reader, by painting you a scene
     {51}
     forward or back? it's true that he
     relations off, and never spoke.
     {217}
        ... ...
     ready to share our quiet leisure
     revive it with another shove --
     from Boston's cloth or gossip's quote;
     relined and strengthened for the drive;
     {82}
     {216}
     and in a singsong voice confide
     am always glad to write, it's true,
     from young Tatyana's dwelling-place,
     forty years long would criticise
     his destiny) without a smile
     resigned disposal of your fate.
     raised a dull eye to moon's refulgence,
     {199}
     from ball to bed behold him come;
     {220}
     fresh as a poppy-flower, your face.''
     {75}
     {162}
     {143}
     {215}
     Prepared for prophecy and fable,
     is this the riddle's missing clue?
     prepares himself; and then his verse,
     piled books, and through the pane the sable
     he saw that, as in cities, here
     fresh leaves... for such is heaven's mandate.
     and in her grief seemed fit to die;
     {111}
     {141}
     Faces before him flash and change
     and, under, ``toute à vous Annette'';
     from cruel fortune such a fate?
     for tempests and for feasts and noise;
     fortunate one, he'd not disgrace;
     {53}
     peopled my sleep, and to their theme
     are entered here, in friendship's gage,
     of the whole world, her nurse alone,
     a stall, a kitchen and a fence.
     penates, came to cast an eye
     {166}
     for him a lofty stair. His shade,
     proficiency to speak and write,
     {90}
     for happiness -- that alien role.
     Parisian taste invents for one --
Pushkin's note.
     An unknown yard, she sees from thence,
     for men to see, still in the scope
     {223}
     put back the libel on the table
     is this then what you can't forgive?
     perhaps, though Phoebus warns, I'll see
     feelings he valued -- from outside.
     from any gentlemanly distance;
     folly for me to interfere
     poetry's sacred frenzy, made
     {40}
     he sang of lifetime's yellowed page --
     perfidious blow to my inside,
     Pikhtín, of the Hussars, was here;
     in sensible old-fashioned style.
     past the grand ladies, see her glide;
     {213}
     {113}
Pushkin's note.
     from whom he'd kept a letter, where
     I keep them, and will quote them here:
     (for which he must receive due praise).
     Petrovsky Castle; and the fame
     for wood and tallow; all the range
     pointed each year, for time to come,
     {70}
     pure passion's flame, and in a trice
     Friend of my heart, be at my side,
     parade before their mocking gaze
     and Grandison beyond compare,
     of something vague, some misty clime;
     for what's been given us to take;
     for him, at night, before the indulgence
     {103}
     And now the door is opened wide,
     I roam by the secluded lake.
     Porcelain and bronzes on the table,
     for swapping bullets with my mate.
     Friends, all this meant was: I've a date
     {212}
     purport of other lines; intense
     pursue his pencil. Everywhere
     {218}
     for she was bored by laughs and noise
     {127}
     puts out the lamps; the whole brigade
     From all sweet things that gave me pleasure,
     {226}
     her darling foot of its wet shoe,
     are coloured in a single tone,
     play on the window's frosted lace;
     all blend into Eugene alone.
     poetic dreams, a brighter fire.
     found that in laughter yawns could stifle:
     Five versts or so from Krasnogórie,
     Faublas'3 disciple for an age --
     promptly had nothing left to give.
     had nothing to employ his life.
     From his first youth he'd known the force,
     a lyre, and on it perched, a dove --
     I've no one here who comprehends me,
     for unmeant kindness -- how he shone!
     {175}
     others prescribe a watering-place.
     of Olga: love's that kind of bore!
     fresh from the cot, an infant pickle,
     of instant thoughts, a fleeting trace
     And here my sentiments impel me
     of love so timorous and gentle.
     and, with it, forced renown to come --
     frightened to death a timid love,
     far more than most who leave this life.
     or, with an epigram-surprise,
     {176}
     or novelties from fashion's page.
     {231}
     Freed from its dripping cork, the bottle
     ``And here's the hearth,'' explains the crone,
     and shouts suggest a crowded wake;
     or servants waiting on her pleasure.
     Olga's appeared upon the scene,
     he found Tatyana so attractive,
     on stage are thumping without cease;
     of modish belles the modish foe,
     freezes my blood... Yet all the same,
     and put his glasses on to see
     of listening like a judge-supreme
     of whispering woods where my Eugene,
     of oligarchical converse,
     Onegin too -- and there to see,
     {98}
     and yet your honour is my gage
     of ranks and ages so diverse.
     of pity for my wretched state,
     and brains, and an attractive face.
     of far-away Onegin's name.
     felicitously every theme,
     {121}
     for you have, at this early date,
     for honour, a straightforward pride.
     a soul of sympathy and grace,
     foretells for her some wondrous role;
     {193}
     of every funeral far and wide;
     {116}
     {185}
     for dreams, or journalistic battle,
     and not without a sigh, perforce
     of calm and reason, when the flame
     of jealousy, to seem to tremble
     Oak-floored, and simple as a stable:
     one pair! I pay them memory's tribute
     and mileposts grip the idle sense
     {229}
     of our first meeting face to face,
     or cause the bursting of his bubble,
     girls' albums, signed in blood for choice;
     her out-of-fashion turns of phrase,
     a group of monsters round a table,
     our vessel's long been overdue.
     of sunlight makes it flash and crumble,
     {119}
     gentlemanly, quite precise,
     are bound, by every virtuous wife,
     Godfearing folk will institute
     It fascinates by its assurance
     of recompense beyond endurance,
     in twilight of allées of lime.
     galop, mazurka, waltz... Meanwhile
     at first she had no heart to range;
     garden, a modest home, the place
     ourselves on our landfall. It's true,
     and then, with an enchanting grace,
     Onegin -- now once more my theme --
     {190}
     6 Gentleman, squire.
     a few books had escaped disgrace:
     has found an end before his time.
     in question, gossip, news and tale,
     and now a swooning mind attends me,
     girls' tears, their swooning, for Eugene
     grew hardened to life's frosty clime;
     you'd not so much as know the name,
     you'll never leave me to my fate.
     Onegin's soul encountered there
     Yet sweeter far, at such a time,
     allow no rest to you or me;
     her drops of tears, and seated there,
     And so, at last, feature by feature,
     had once before, across the scene
     of tears will cloud her tender gaze.
     an inn at each stage of the route.
     And every morning I awake
     In languid silence, or the flame
     youthful, who ripened in his time,
     her progress at the masquerade.
     yes, focus on them your lorgnette,
in Russia among the common people.'' Pushkin's note.
     and country stillness: there the lyre
     of eloquence, and just the same
     a skeleton jerked by a cable,
     her soul was waiting... for someone.
     gay nature and its sparkling distance!
     Onegin looks with eyes of fire:
     your night of fretting's left no trace!
     you're all in fever... heavens above.''
     his head upon her shoulder... blaze
     ours was no Grandison -- not he.
     and dutifully shared his life
     O flowers, and love, and rustic leisure,
     good-looking, in the flower of age,
     you help him to an honoured fate
     had come to him in field and glade;
     youth is a fever; we must spare
     How early on he learnt to trouble
     in talk, so fruitless and so stale,
     is with dull trash that can't cohere:
     of the cotillion's endless theme
     Of Lensky's fate they said no more --
     of wandering tribesmen; while the ravage
     had chased me to the world above.''
     a hybrid cross of cat and crane.
     yourself too long from social life.''
     your early life, unlock your tongue:
     has wished it an abrupt goodbye --
     and found her dreams, her secret fire,
     on tragedy; but it's no joke,
     young Tanya first appeared to me,
     He's gone away and left his village,
     years back, to call up many a fable;
     As far removed as they were able
     he'd see his soul cool in its grate;
     into the tomb's mysterious shade;
     at last the final hours arrive.
     he would have found a normal fate.
     of youth, so tender, so intense?
     you've paid insanity its due.
     all in a blaze, I said: it's he!
     your feet, to pale and waste... what rapture!
     old Uncle's end was soon to be.
     or else, from far off, he could see
     of a provincial ingénue,
     Omens dismayed her with their presage;
     of sighs, and compliments, and fire;
     ``I close. I dread to read this page...
     your matchlessness, to seek to capture
     he killed eight years in such a style,
     your words, and in my soul to explore
     yet dared not trust what I could see.
     his pup to grace the sledge, while he
     his mother taps the window-pane.
     he'll take you prisoner, you'll admire
     he read of course the sceptic Bayle15
     of their society turned her savage,
     youth's choice, the flower of French cuisine:
     her fingers shake, she doesn't dare
     on her smug face a flush of pleasure.
     He nods -- they start to fuss and truckle;
     you were the first ones he forswore;
     one raves in verse like me, and one
     and set off prompter than a whistle
     yet how I wish that I might raise
     of tales of girls, and ghosts, and lore:
     on billiard-table rests a cue,
     I regularly take much pleasure
     on points that all long since agree --
     of love's anxiety. Blessed is he
     he laughs -- they all begin to chuckle;
     Zaretsky bit his lip. Eugene
     our modern Russia's plague and bane.
     or else disturb my mournful trance
     (on orders which of course presume
     adorned the sanctum of our sage.
     yet, truthfully and not in chaff,
     {68}
     15 A mocking  reference to Mikhail  Muraviev's poem ``To the Goddess of
     in a peaked cap, all dust and fluff, --
     who'll clap an entrechat, or scoff
     as I have... learn from my belief
     and in flat calm I've found the stuff
with which XXXII ends, is Pushkin's own contribution, a sample as it were of
     and took two Petriads in calf,
     And now the two opponents doff
     just as the Poet15 paints himself.
     is forced to crucify himself,
     or pining, Olga's hours were brief.
     upon the side of the distaff --
     at Cleopatra, hiss her off,
     that inexperience leads to grief.''
     he never took one from the shelf,
     and leant upon the granite shelf;
     now even Didelot's tedious stuff.''
     their cloaks; Zaretsky's measured off
     that was less clever still by half.
     she once had pined in girlish grief,
     his sweetheart faithful to her grief.
     could see no harm in books; himself
     4 Serfs chosen as recruits for the army had their forelock cut off.
     4 Refers to Pushkin's poem The Demon, of 1823.
     of Morpheus had induced relief
     he charged three roubles and a half,
     odd volumes from the devil's shelf,
     or else does nature, fresh and staring,
     of time between the wolf and dog.)
     ``oh, quit your stale, your tedious quacking,
     our troikas effortlessly dashing,
     had fortune blest me by prescribing
     only the pallor of heart-breaking
     Hours pass; no answer; waiting, waiting.
     Olga's adorer comes a-wooing.
     or simply bow: within her being
     great bard despite his modest trapping,
     once more that touch is fiercely troubling
     5 Girl in Zhukovsky's  poem who practises divination,  with frightening
     over the business of leave-taking,
     Or, unconsoled by the returning
     On such indifference, such forgetting
     outside, the scarlet rays of dawning
     one day came down that lonely turning,
     One melancholy fop, declaring
     From violent passions fast pulsating
     how sensuously her eyes are dreaming!
     of gossip, and set comment humming
     of many distant lands he sang
     Once more he counts the hour-bells tolling,
     on visits to us, and in greeting
     for grumbling, gossiping and swearing
     he who has cooled down love with parting,
     one customary object gleaming,
     over the slush, where is he chasing?
     On an old aunt, who's long been burning
     pinker than glow of Northern morning,
     for which of them the tomb was yawning,
     flows and reverberates. Reciting,
     Poor Lensky! Set aside for weeping,
     four fateful stairs. Then, without slowing
     < Petushkóv's nails and spurs are sounding
     How often would I fall to musing
     For such am I. When you were speaking
     Petushkóv, local Paris, tearing,
     fancies once more are hotly bubbling,
     our native speech had never sprung
     perpetually, one goal for dreaming,
     On the seashore, with storm impending,
     her worth (but anathematising
     roses romantically blowing;
     of solitude, and peace abiding!
     from off her charming shoulder's drooping,
     For cousins from afar, on meeting
     for shame and fear my wits are sliding...
     gripped him no more; soon they were raising
     Risen with earliest rays of dawning,
     reader, we must be separating,
     respect, and mercy for my dreaming.
     Evgeny! ``Ah!'' Tatyana, fleeting
     earth's rim grows light, and a forewarning
     his sobs, where his live tears were flowing;
     Or, in your lonely homestead, moping,
     else, having found his pleasure cloying,
     still coughing, hissing, clapping, champing;
     Evgeny waits: and here comes driving,
     hate, love, joy, sorrow -- every feeling,
     secluded vales, where swans were crying,
     of one sole thought holds him in keeping
     5 Satiric poem by Ivan Dimitriev, 1795. The reference is -- summarizing
     Each one by now is badly needing
     everything's dim and unenthusing;
     shocked by their modish pride, and fleeing
     even the scandal's not amusing;
     of any Bréguet: and in passing
     So went his sermon. Almost dying,
     embodied by the power of dreaming,
     He sees: in slush, stretched out and keeping
     stare hard at her before exchanging
     has voices that are more resounding,
     shows freedom's advocate, that strong
     So, like Childe Harold, glum, unpleasing,
     each news of her he'd been imbibing --
     Elbow on table, spirit seething,
     Elated by the music's blaring,
     her golden earrings off and whipping;
     Now powder's greyish stream is slipping
     each in tumultuous turn descending
     some splendid lady is referring
     No one will think that worth gainsaying,
     So you, inspired Yazýkov,4 sobbing
     She's dressed since dawn, dead pale; debating,
     his news has set the party humming!
     silver with moonlight, in her dreaming
     He sweetened up with fancy's icing
     Shot through below the chest -- and streaming
     ``Now march.'' And calmly, not yet seeking
     Since dawn, whole families have been driving
     set off our troubled mind comparing
     she lowers darkened eyes, unwitting,
     Still as he was? has he stopped prancing?
     neighbours in high content are wheezing;
     Her eyes along the margin flitting
     stirred at your gaze, so strange, so gleaming,
     Silence was everywhere enthralling;
     So down came Tanya, hardly daring
     Dressed like -- --,14 duly dreading
     he warns his man for duty, stressing
     some nonsense thrown up while carousing,
     she's nearly swooned, she's suffocating;
     no glance so sweet, no sigh so teasing,
     Deep down, an epigram is stirring
     Next day Tatyana, early waking,
     night of the second, started flaking.
     desires and dreams and griefs were breeding
     Straight up the chimney, pipes were smoking.
     soon, infidelity proved cloying,
     devoted to the Muse, or learning,
     dead ash sets no more sparks a-flying;
     no years of absence past returning,
     Day faded; on the table, glowing,
     Smiling through sleep, nature is meeting
     Hurrah! let's start congratulating
     declares itself in ways unwitting --
     still hardly opened up, from fading.''
     She dropped... ``It's he! Eugene arriving!
     such is the usual country cooking;
     giddy as Venus when she's mounting
     she trembles, and with fever drumming
     daren't look behind her; fairly dashing --
     shadows that flit behind the glazing
     She looks: forgotten past all chalking
     Childe-Harold-like, Eugene's devoting
     of innocence: a lily blooming
     started a life of pointless roaming,
     so long as they're employed in song:
     such rustic cunning can't be wrong!) --
     champion of rights, as in the wrong.
     she holds a letter up, and leaning
     his weary head, and softly drooping
     calls out his name... All unavailing:
     ``Could I be happy circumscribing
     she loved the steppe-land and its singing,
     she saw no friendly figure starting
     spurs of Chevalier Gardes are clinking,
     Chairs are pushed outward, loudly rumbling,
     sets the wise traveller cavorting
     he consecrated to my keeping?...
     sets a sonorous cadence rolling --
     or if himself, with rage arousing,
     She dreamt of portents. In her dreaming
     scarlet with passion's instant flaring,
     Giving his pistol-butt a squeezing,
     he had conveyed some moral teaching,
     she walked, but just as she was turning
     Now Tanya's groaning, now she's sighing;
     her sacred store of bliss and weeping
     shelter for trysts at every turning;
     cows low, in the still nights of spring
     she's turned up in my garden, bringing
     Now he's returned, what role's he dancing?
     her love obeys the laws of feeling,
     through heaven's expanse serenely flying,
     that queen of secrets and of sighing.
     they kill the zest of rhymed composing,
     No, early on his heart was cooling
     The years incline to gloom and prosing,
     How often, when the sky was glowing,
     the shepherd sings of Volga's fishing
     comes clearer through the mists of dawning.
     Can she have found the enigma's setting?
     came distant horns, and gallant singing.
     his life till dawn's already making,
     he wakes; a bath where ice is floating;
     no, not for long were belles the ruling
     council, and with profound head-shaking
     There came a murmur, for a fleeting
     that lady the hostess was greeting,
     ``The man's a boor; his brain is missing,
     the infant year with cheerful greeting:
     But she who modelled for the sketching
     but wildly still her heart is rushing,
     But finally she heaved a yearning
     the thirst for work, the lust for learning,
     behind deceit or double-dealing?)
     the nightingale's begun to sing.
     hope sting it, then we'll try deploying
     that fiery souls' headstrong enthusing
     that from the backdoor he'd be leaving
     the bliss that fills me when your throbbing,
     breaking the lilac bushes, smashing
     the frozen corpse, drives off, and homing
     to Eugene all was new and thrilling;
     beyond a doubt, its wondrous tracing
     The storm is over,5 dawn is paling,
     Not so? ``No, sirs, the ode's the thing,
     Three whole hours, at the least accounting,
     now ten has struck, his wheels are rolling,
     no vision of her fields is dawning.
     the level tenor of his going,
     the foes, cold-blooded and unspeaking,
     the barbs that envy's always spreading,
     nor from the bath-house roof be clearing
     He lay quite still, and strange as dreaming
     Neighbours in whispered tones are taking
     now golden autumn's just arriving.
     to drop all that old-fashioned mumming;
     behind her followed wildly dancing;
     Bacchante-like, her flighty prancing;
     There was a pine-branch downward straying
     no time to pick it up -- she's dying
     he murmurs: ``Olga's mine for saving;
     his beasts outdoors at dawn, nor ringing
     by mist of tears, without replying
     time was when morning's breeze was swaying
     No madrigals were for inscribing
     But while she roams in thought, not caring
     to whom, in a fine flow of preaching,
     but, inside brackets, I'm contending
     new guest is gradually progressing,
     ``The morning star will soon be shining,
     the answer's past all human viewing,
     the hour was late. And now from aching
     that poisonous worm, despised, degrading,
     But now they're near. Already gleaming
     gossip, and tricks, and the patrolling
     before a fire too slowly flaming,
     the old dame wept her daughter's parting,
     They laugh. The guests begin arriving.
     the audience still is busy stamping,
     the shades of night within their keeping
     through him is sweetness' self. In grumbling
     By now the rays of spring are chasing
     but ladies' hands are not for kissing;
     to draw a breath, around her staring
     they're plunging, whirling, all but squatting.
     there's crashing, rumbling, pounding, trotting,
     No, I was born for peace abounding
     Her husband enters, thus concluding
     Below it, when sprang rains are swishing,
     (that half-pay archivist); and bounding
     the gallery claps -- it's bored with waiting --
     he had the talent of saluting
     he and Onegin start alluding
     The house is packed out; scintillating,
     they're on the dance-floor, waltzing, spinning.
     before you on the ground, unhearing,
     There too, he honoured, hotly weeping,
     but piteous he, the all-foreseeing,
     But it's the talent for concealing
     The banquet's given no cause for sneezing,
     By now the shades of night are flying,
     Moscow... how many strains are fusing
     But he's mistaken: Eugene's lying
     but I perhaps will be declining
     then in the study's quiet setting,
     Meanwhile, attired for morning strolling
     he takes her to a chair, beginning
     Triquet sings, out of tune. Loud clapping
     tribute of tears, applause's shrilling,
     ``By virtue of procrastinating
     there сzerov8 shared the unwilling
     he should have settled for disarming
     He could have spoken without harming,
     beside his heavier half is snoring.
     believes in her elected dreaming
     Bubbles like Hippocrene are spraying;
     motionless as one soundly sleeping
     He'd brought back all the fruits of learning
     the regimental band is coming,
     Time races, and she's been forgetting
     bottles to which some pitch is clinging:
     be good enough to go on reading:
     More wine, he calls, to drench the flaming
     towards the Larins' and arriving
     the third day, wood and hill and grazing
     that modish rings were still a-buying.
     The old dame had no thought of scouring
     This work of the profoundest learning
     here's tea that Olga's been preparing;
     his spindly, shaggy nag. As fitting,
     meanwhile the local Cyclops, aiming
     hunts cheeky flies, with swatter sweeping,
     he steers her, nonchalantly gliding,
     as from their luscious hive go tumbling
     These figures from the world of seeming,
     that there his friend Kavérin's5 waiting;
     he stoops and, tenderly confiding,
     and eatables beyond all classing
     His visitor from the beginning
     The north wind blows, the clouds are driving --
     and thus our race, so fluctuating,
     to lift her skirt up; still she's flying,
     and Paris too. But hear my pleading:
     to roar of banquets, din of brawling,
     (alas, too salted); now they're bringing
     my thoughtless pen has stopped designing,
     Mushrooms in brine, for winter eating,
     meantime she'd give the maids a beating
     and for her cheeks to cease their blushing;
     to talk as if with heart unwrung,
     through gloom and mist; and there came streaming
     Tatyana dear, with you I'm weeping:
     Meanwhile the news of Eugene coming
     The bearded outrider is sitting
     to smother her dear feet with kissing.
     He finds the shock beyond all bearing:
     a story that still wants completing;
     her bosom heaves, her cheeks are staring
     And now, monotonously dashing
     ``The peasants there have wealth abounding,
     my hours in fear and bitter crying.
     Tatyana looks with pulses racing
     then night comes on; the moon's patrolling
     to meet a black monk, or if crossing
     magic of sleep had started claiming
     and all this flashy masquerading,
     Tanya (profoundly Russian being,
     Two weeks the matchmaker was plying
     Then our Automedons are flashing,
     Once more he turned to books, unchoosing,
     the towers of whitestone Moscow beaming
     the pain, the grief, the marrow-freezing
     the utter virtue of their being,
     ``My dearest heart, you're sick and ailing.''
     and gallops. Pistols made for pairing
     his style breathed love, and not the gibing
     ``Tell me, our neighbours, are they thriving?
     The hearth was low beyond all stoking.
     allows her hand, that's lost all feeling,
     that, artless, and without concealing,
     maiden in this superb, unthinking
     then, country evening fast arriving,
     may spend a century in flaying
     to his disputing and his cursing;
     the horse gets wind of them and, snorting,
     All sleep: from the saloon a roaring
     to his Tatyana, yes, he's racing,
     their southward flight: one saw approaching
     as if beneath her, dark and rumbling,
     The sky breathed autumn, time was flowing,
     the merchant's up, the cabman's walking
     that strikes him with such force and meaning?
     towards his stall, the pedlar's hawking;
     Tatyana leaves Onegin kneeling,
     awaits him -- hears nobody coming.
     That point I wouldn't mind contesting,
     ``The elegy's just vain protesting,
     that's the refrain that you should sing,
     the occupations of the morning.
     there never fails a kindly greeting,
     There you're entirely sure of finding
     among the guests a general dinning:
     And now there's gradually beginning
     a calculation past despising --
     Then what resulted from the meeting?
     Love's frantic torments went on beating
     and all is lost beyond retrieving;
     and there at large he goes patrolling
     the clink of rowels, met his hearing;
     Tatyana's husband, now appearing...
     the rosy sealing-wafer's drying
     the herdsman's horn proclaimed the morning
     listless, impatient, for the pounding
     Then, after midday he'll be waking;
     He mounts the sledge, with daylight fading:
     light as a shadow, shuns a meeting,
     that she's ``ideal'', begins preparing
     a saucy kibítka is slicing
     a word or two, or stare unseeing,
     his collar in its beaver braiding
     the unworthy husband through depressing
     lickspittles who adore their crawling,
     They've missed Eugene's completed etching.
     ``Tell me, what's your companion doing?''
     Tatyana flushed, and started shaking.
     ``the mail explains the time he's taking.''
     the urn of perfumed tea, and tipping
     {106}
     They sing; unmoved by their sweet-sounding
     and though perhaps old fires were thrusting
     and stops his doleful heart from sleeping:
     log cabin a pretentious-teasing
     untouched by envy's bitter smarting,
     up your accounts, and raging, toping,
     on my untimely urn be weeping,
     and ``what's your name?'' she asks him, speaking
     Already Olga's hand was gripping
     affected pose -- and an unspeaking
     a far-flung traveller who was creaking
     urbane betrayals, and the chilling
     Uncle, in bed, and near to dying,
     It's over. Supper is proceeding.
     lies bright, and vast beyond perceiving;
     Vladimir shuts the book, for writing
     and warmed the Chinese teapot; flowing
     and good old sun more seldom glowing;
     At last, with dawn upon him, stooping
     just yesterday.'' ``And since your christening
     and wakened Lensky by exclaiming:
     just sentries to each other calling,
     Only from Tanya's heart, no cheering --
     Just facing Tanya's where they're sitting;
     I write, my heart has ceased its pining,
     Vladimir drops, hand softly sliding
     Away inside that unassuming
     have snorted, reared, and whitely foaming
     Vladimir, wealthy and good-looking,
     is softly, indolently sleeping,
     all a pure maiden's love was breathing.
     And while with all despatch he's dressing
     Already now the talk was thriving
     when night patrol's a perilous calling;
     a soul so innocent, so trusting.
     is sad old moon's... Hark! snow is creaking...
     We all meandered through our schooling
     with love and comfort in your meaning,
     in goods and fame!'' But the sad-sounding
     what's in them? All this loud parading,
     as files, and scissors straight and curving,
     What power enslaves you, with your seeming
     I longed, like every breaker hissing,
     while serious topics were disputing,
     How heavy, and how near to sobbing,
     into a modish tyrant's keeping
     a hermit's life -- he'd be proceeding
     and so, before the world of learning,
     and though to do so would be daring,
     And yet, although it's past conveying,
     will in my soul be hushed and dying.
     Weltered in tears, and sorely smarting,
     ``I can't sleep, nyanya: it's so stifling!
     and radiate a rainbow: blazing
     In summertime -- for he was leading
     as all things did, to bore him; homing,
     I'll catalogue each simple saying
     and entered. Ballroom overflowing...
     is calling us, for ever calling --
     and duck get up; with instant timing,
     at heart by grim remorse's freezing.
     and band already tired of blowing,
     inns don't exist; but in a freezing
     He's flown to Talon's,4 calculating
     incendiary looks are slinking,
     once, with its foaming and its playing,
     and where is love's tempestuous yearning,
     was still mysterious and enticing --
     What of it? Nothing. I'm just sending
     and some were even testifying
     when, utterly worn out by rhyming,
     was stripped away, and mists encroaching
     ``I dread your stern regard surmising
     and where the husband, recognizing
     In fact one day a note came flying
     As if before some mournful parting
     while in the hut a girl is singing;
     in Russian winters thrilled at seeing
     Who's not disgusted by cajoling,
     it melts, away it rushes, racing
     and tell of children's plighted playing
     appears offensive or amusing
     we'll keep love's price appreciating,
     a different mask? is he becoming
     Why is Tatyana guiltier-seeming?
     admires the tumult and the pressing,
     {178}
     and everything around was dreaming,
     a sharp-nailed paw towards her; bracing
     if, motionless, no life appearing,
     our Mother Eve: we're never falling
     it's new to us, beyond gainsaying;
     it's my profession; he was wearing --
     What happened? Though his eyes were reading,
     above the water started tracing
     of hope is somehow still surviving
     a scream rings out... the cabin's quaking...
     amongst devout coquettes, appalling
     all of an emptiness so killing -- >
     were you in love when you were young?''
     and growing thicker; then, heart-shaking,
     its furrow through the powdery icing;
     would leave her dithering and tossing.
     I'm near to sobbing, near to weeping!...''
     ``Why, Tanya, what...?'' ``All's dull and trifling.
     a spirit strange, a spirit burning,
     and your alas-ing and alack-ing
     while Petersburg's already rousing,
     it's easy, without too much fooling,
     And Eugene? half-awake, half-drowsing,
     with combs, and steel utensils serving
     While Lensky'd long been meditating
     into the fields, surveys the morning,
     in you a tender pulse was beating,
     I'll stop that tempter from depraving
     a general of majestic bearing
     What fate is my tomorrow brewing?
     ``I noticed once, at our chance meeting,
     If only Lensky'd known the burning
     a suite of elegies that, throbbing,
     ``I am in love,'' Tatyana's wailing
     If Tanya'd had the chance of learning
     I must translate -- there's no presuming --
     At first they called; but on perceiving
     Whatever for caprice of spending
     all was material for transcribing:
     and with its feeble glow outlining
     ignores approval's friendly clapping,
     in quilted coat, where rays were gleaming
     I see another problem looming:
     are we recalled to grief still burning
     is death, not pain. So gently gliding
     And all the while the moon was shining
     in the expression of its being,
     and friends and friendship, soul-destroying;
     it was quite torn in half and breaking.
     would settle, on the morrow morning,
     ``What in the world is more distressing
     and now the crunchy snow is stripping
     when Bréguet's chime is heard proclaiming
     how proudly, how divinely gleaming,
     and where Thalia, gently napping,
     whisper of breeze announces morning,
     into the pan. Securely gripping,
     its wayward tricks, its violent surging,
     We too shall find our hour is waiting;
     with lines to mark where they were sleeping...
     its echoes, its belated urging,
     where in the heart of silence rang
     what came from this unlooked-for meeting;
     inspires your lute to sounds of sighing?
     in all its mystery. Hymen's teasing,
     would have divined the tender, shrinking
     with spinning noise and senseless flashing
     is this the man that you were seeking?
     as if she'd been profoundly sleeping,
     and sideways her poor head is stooping.
     Alas for him! there was no keeping
     outside the house. But you'll be aching
     and there, love's protestations, binding
     one wallows in delicious weeping;
     ingenious London has been sending
     And all grandmothers who are listening
     after your drive, it's quite back-breaking;
     about one thing, till our next meeting.
     {45}
     {92}
     In swarms around Tatyana ranging,
     a fisher's fire. Through country gleaming
     a mansion stands just round a turning.
     a great attraction to conversing.
     I know your heart: it has a feeling
     he struggled to bite back the chilling
     a riding whip. Tanya keeps walking...
     and when its waters were not showing,
     and in it boldly I'm confiding''...
     {102}
     and captive girls, by Salgir20 lying.
     Manzoni and Chamfort,12 perusing
     at last alone, and quite forgetting
     and then a boat, with oars a-swinging,
     you'd made appearance in my dreaming;
     Only the estate provides a setting
     yes, in that spring-time, in low-lying
     your dashing one, is she surviving?''
     audacious tunnels will be marching:
     and iron bridges will go arching
     Your curiosity is burning
     ``You're ill, God have you in his keeping,
     accounts were done, a winter outing
     you drink the magic draught of yearning,
     and, on my bed-head gently leaning,
     Zaretsky, engineer-in-waiting,
     They're settled in; and crawling, sliding,
     Zaretsky watched, and stood there grinning.
     he turns away: ``I've had enough --
     his dull, sick look, his dumb reproach --
     his humbly suppliant approach,
     you'll recognize him soon enough, --
     its due oblivion, in the hush
     Meanwhile Onegin starts to languish:
     You'll love again, but you must teach
     your heart some self-restraint; for each
     you won't find that quite so much catch...
     your pride, some answer, or in truth
     he'd drink his coffee, flutter through
     heartfelt, imploring, touching trash
     a rooster head, and on the twitch
     a dog with horns, a goatee'd witch,
     held in constraint by pity's touch:
     nanny, companion of my youth;
     her thoughts away, knew how to lavish
     no vulgar epigram too much,
     his neighbour entered at a rush
     now pay attention, I beseech,
     he's got consumption. In his anguish
     of perfect bliss in you. Enough!
     once I too liked it very much;
     human reaction, every speech
     only to Eugene showed their worth;
     of neighbouring owners of the earth --
     my noon is here, and that's the truth.
     he eyes the door, looks slyly through.
     of the most harmless, hopeless trash.
     God grant them years and years of health!
     over it a mysterious wreath:
     of waiting for the dawn to blush,
     fieldwork directed from the path,
     fades from the view, and in the hush
           Petrarch
     fragments of poems from the North,
     fancies, my rhythmic search for truth,
     parodies winter in the south;
     Poor Tanya's bloom begins to languish,
     paved roads will traverse Russia's length
     11 Russian poet and translator from the French.
     so fires of spring will bring to birth
     so that all three went off to lunch,
     so pure, so spotless through and through,
     summons his people. On the sleigh
     soon all that went without a wrench:
     Sbogar,8 mysterious through and through,
     she flies no more, she's lost her strength.
     Dear Tanya, you're condemned to perish;
     set the guests smiling at his arch,
     crossed to the window, read it through.
     custom's bestowed us from on high.
     so sketchily possessed by each,
     suddenly lowering eyes that languish,
     take leave of my lightheaded youth!
     is finished, and I've looked it through
     choked up. There's no wreath on the bough;
     but I'm allergic to the North...1
     the abstracted poet would bring forth
     the bloom has withered on the bough;
     breaks a new passage with his sleigh;
     but first, the dreams that hope can cherish
     towards the simple urn beneath;
     but by and large their talk's a hash
     bringing her unity and strength;
     The poet's dead... already though
     both set him yawning just as much.
     the young hostess, towards whom each
     the flickering tones of dress and speech,
     in triumph you'll see winter through!
     the Russian N, like N in French;
     but when you've managed his despatch
     but here we must control our mouth.
     and sighs, and asks oneself all through:
     a madrigal for epitaph.
     and offer to that ash a sigh;
     the tongue of love and of Petrarch.
     Tatyana, hunted by love's anguish,
     the driver sits and cuts a dash
     Lensky composed in autograph
     the sober head, detesting each
     accounts, shaved forelocks,4 Sunday bath;
     along the Neva in a sleigh,
     the meaning of an epigraph,
     there's nothing can employ her anguish,
     there's no absurdity as such,
     and arm in arm they all go through;
     There once I too strolled back and forth:
     a portrait with a charming touch;
     {56}
     4 Jean Lepage, Parisian gunsmith.
     who in the dark came flashing through
     just there, is talking to the Spanish
     Who taught her all this mad, slapdash,
     a friend of yours in his first youth
     won't even cross their minds by stealth...
     and scorned his fellows through and through,
     and to Tanya, when he was through,
     and take due warning from my speech.
     and all the neighbours planned a match
     were picking berries from the bough,
     was asked around as quite a catch --
     a seedling fallen in the earth.
     ``Wait, I'll present you -- but you banish
     and raven curls of shoulder-length.
     an eloquence of fevered strength,
     with deep emotion through and through,
     my Africa,18 where waves break high,
     {170}
     and he pursuing, till at length
     a modish taste, a dowdy touch --
     with lies and jokes that packed a punch:
     with foppery and too much starch,
     {78}
     Another had the skill to ravish
     {81}
     I hear the wrath of your reproach.
     is it not true that Russian speech,
     in my petition an approach,
     I count each hour the whole day through;
     impatient, hatred flaming high;
     {140}
     in sheepskin coat with scarlet sash.
     I love my Tatyana too much!
     allows no comfort to come through --
        XXVIII
        XVII
        XLIII
        XXVII
        XVI
        XXXIII
        XXI
        XXIII
        XI
        XXXIII
        XXVI
        XII
        XVIII
        XIII
        II
        XLII
        XIII
        XVI
        II
        XII
        XLVII
        XXI
        XVI
        XVIII
        XI
        XVII
        XXXVI
        XLI
        XIII
        XXII
        III
        III
        XVIII
        XXXII
        XXIII
        XXII
        XXIII
        XVIII
     {233}
        XXI
        XXI
        XII
        XXI
        XLVI
        II
        XXIII
        XXXIII
        XXII
        XXII
        XXIII
        XVIII
        XVII
        (XV, XVI,2) XVII
        XXIII
        XXVI
        XXVI
        XIII
        XXXII
        XXXVII
        XXXI
        XXVII
        XXVIII
        XII
        XLVII
        XI
        XXVII
        XXVII
        XI
        XVIII
        XXXI
        XLIII
        XXXI
        XXXVIII
        XLI
     I'd not have known you, therefore I
        XVII
        XXXII
        XXXII
        XXXVI
        (I, II, III, IV, V, VI,1) VII
        XLVIII
        XXXIII
        XXVIII
        XVII
        (XXXIX, XL, XLI,) XLII
        XXVIII
        XXXVI
        XXII
        < XXXVII7
        XXXVIII
        XXXVII
        XXXVIII
        XXXVIII
        XXVI
        XXXVII
        XXVIII
        XLI
        XXXVI
        XXVII
        XLII
        XVI
        XXXI
        XXVI
        XXVI
        XXVI
        XII
        XLIII7
        XVI
        XXXI
        XXXIII
        III
        XVII
        II
        XXXVI
        XLVI
        XXIII
        XXII
        XVI
        XXVII
        XXI
        XLVI
        XXI
        XXXII
        LIII
        XI
        XXXIII
        XXII
     All in good time, on each point I
        LI
        XXXVII
        II
        XXII
        XXVIII
        XXVII
        III
        XVIII
        I
        XLVIII
        XLVII
        I
        XXXII
        I
        ... ...
        XXXVIII
        XVIII
        I
        XVII
        XXIII
        VI
        XVI
        VI
        VI
        VII
        VIII
        VII
        XLVII
        VII
        VI
        VII
        VI
        VII
        XLVIII
        VIII
        VIII
Pushkin's poem The Fountain of Bakhchisarai.
        VIII
        VIII
        VI
        VII
        VIII
        I
        VIII
        VII
        XXXVIII
        VI
        XXXVI
        III
        XLVI
        XIII
        XXXVII
        XIII
        XXI
        XII
        LVII
        LVIII
     6 Stanza discarded by Pushkin, also stanza XXXVIII.
        LI
        XXXI
        XXXVII
        LI
     a gulf has gaped... Says Tanya: ``I
        XLIII
        XLVIII
        II
        XLI
        III
        XII
        XXVIII
        XXVI
        XI
        XXXII
        XXXII
        XLII
        XIII
        XXXI
        XXXI
        XLII
        III
        XLIII
        LIII
        XXXIII
     and, with my Eugene, so have I.
        XI
        LII
          La, sotto giorni nubilosi e brevi.
--------
        LII
     the poet's only theme is ``I.''
        LI
        XXXVI
        XLII
        XLIII
        XLVII
        XI
        XXXVI6
        II
        LVI
        XLI
     In stead of happiness, say I,
        XXXIII
        XII
        XXXVII
     It's time she went. But what can I
        XXVII
        XXVIII
        XLVI
        XLI
     by Lensky in his Olga's book;
     by dint of cuff and kick and smack
     but all concurred that, truth to speak,
     Tatyana had a changeling look
     the heart inside him seemed to shrink;
     they managed to disperse the pack.
     their guests, for all they ate and drank,
     by ancient limes, or by a brook;
     but pantaloons, waistcoat, and frock,
     the other, jugs of applejack,
     but meanwhile let him live, and think
     behind the mill. In solemn talk,
     Ladies of such a cast, I think,
     blest is the advent of the dark!
     these words are not of Russian stock:
     though years ago I used to look
     By dire presentiment awestruck,
     blessed are daytime's care and cark,
     terse words or crosses in the book,
     but when past joking he fell sick,
     at hours, which, why I cannot think,
     in taffeta of mourning black.
     and never played a shrewder trick.
     to pass for an affected freak,
     And just here, in the window-nook,
     and sees... whatever do you think?
     as much of banquets and the cork
     coldness of wit; each note he took,
     lest he should by some clever trick
     sad meditations in her look,
     {194}
     the branches of the oak with flock;
     and bred upon the Neva's brink,
     a mild rebuke was his worst mark,
     and then a stroll in Letny Park.
     Tatyana, sleepless in the dark,
     to kiss Armida's lips, or seek
     deep in distraction, his own rook.
     the flaming roses of a cheek,
     their journey took them a full week.
     and riches, and the wish to thank
     the enjoyment of a friendly drink,
     she peers discreetly through a chink
     does he still pose, and play the freak?
     {126}
     already she'd assume ill-luck.
     So now be off to Neva's brink,
     to hope that even once a week
     so much, I'm left no time to speak!
     even without me it will sink;
     Eugene has caught up, quick as quick,
     then Lensky moved his pawn, and took,
     says the old lady in a croak:
     all shout and argue, laugh and squeak.
     let no more such digressions lurk
     replies: ``We might as well.'' They walk
     from her my lips will learn and mark
     fruits of my labour and my ink...
     like Delvig3 when he's dining drunk.
     avert his chest from pistol's click,
     fruit liqueurs and an Almanack
     to gasp, and on a bench to sink.
     Vesper is met by crow of cock --
     and sleeping sounder than a rock.
     parting with Olga made him think
     verdicts of vanity the bleak,
     {207}
     in stars upon the river-brink.
     any Madonna by Van Dyck:
     at the Academic Diction-book.
     with lively and pellucid look,
     was an enchanting country nook:
     Lensky's thrown down. The murk is thick
     would bless the form his fortune took.
     what play will he present this week?
     parterres, she runs to rivulet's brink,
     I'll just remark, my verses talk
     {129}
     first flakes of snow whirl round and sink
work.
     I move in the grand monde? that rank,
     I might have seen you, heard you speak
     of traveller's tedium at its peak:
     of course! you're bidden there next week.''
     and, in her hand, a small French book.
     and finally be turned to rock
     for heart's delight, or fun, you took,
     or else, my friend, how does it look?
     {64}
     grow cold, and hard, and stiff as stock,
     or else a query's wondering hook.
     {46}
     God grant that from this little book
     amateur of caprice and quirk.
     where flows a little glittering brook,
     he was a menace, and a freak.
     at any other sort of book.
     {188}
     where you were born as well, I think,
     had left the squire no time to look
     with draughts from love's enticing flask,
     were served in order of their rank.
     in father's or old uncle's book,
     in morning time he'd read a book...
     {80}
     {36}
     is agony, if I may speak,
     his elegies flow like a brook.
     in this fifth chapter of my work.
     he sounds, in lyric frenzy sunk,
     {164}
     in her own home. She never took
     none listens when the others speak,
     and hid the bookshelf's dusty stack
     you too have seen on Neva's brink.
     you called there twice, and since then took
     and swaggers in a red calpack;
     across the fields, round hill and rock;
     you made me drunk as one could ask!
     more closely at the grammar-book;
     men's thoughts, their plots, the words they speak,
     heeding the press, will make us look
     a crayfish rides on spider-back;
     and to that far and lonely nook
     Muse of the epic, bless my work!
     makes to her nurse low-voiced remark:
     spirit that anguish had made ill.
     shows up through trees, all of a grovel
     ``She was the one who looked as still
     Shy as a savage, silent, tearful,
     6 Delphine, by Madame de Staël, 1805.
     sentiment, notebook, verses, all
     she quite forgot -- began to call
     ``Maidens, pretty maidens all,
     she went inside the empty shell
     drank in your words when all was still --
     I find myself no longer equal;
     shall make my story grim as hell;
     darts to the boy, and looks, and still
     Lensky resolved before the duel
     such stubborn brain, and vivid will,
     still captivated his young soul.
     spectacled age divines as well,
     direct from shipboard into ball.
     dear ladies' feet fly past like hail,
     Since then Martin Zadéka's spell
     swiftly decayed beyond recall
     like foliage in the rotting fall.
     she finds in river and in hill.
     She sits down by the window-sill.
     can read enough to get my fill.
     that spring with me has had its fill
     ever so roughly rocked my soul!
     my soul in secret gave survival;
     send them good wishes through the mail
     and coachmen swear, and women squeal.
     to face him now I feel too frail...
     the world's éclat, its thunder-roll,
     that wit embarrasses the dull;
     to the complacent and the null;
     she can't; Evgeny's pushed the portal,
     The years would pass; no longer youthful,
     sed alia tempora! The devil
     empire, and fled it; happier still
     brigade of liveries in the hall,
          Still for ever, fare thee well.
     enquired the lady of the hall:
     Lord Byron's portrait on the wall,
     left quite alone with his own soul,
     But let's return to our essential,
     to tales that young moustachios tell.
     so heartless and so detrimental,
     she'd never tell them news or scandal
     engaged then -- but against her will;
     to bring across Lepage's4 mortal
     early tomorrow at the mill
     (like passion's dream, that other revel)
     Evgeny stood, with soul regretful,
     But ever stranger and more fearful:
     beauty with all its heavenly spell,
     But how she jumped, when in this hovel
     the child prepares for protocol --
     and still exempted from removal
     Still blazing with resentment's fuel,
     and watched a different world unroll.
     Relations. No-one else at all.
     from the agent, with this tale to tell:
     {187}
     two sisters who'd received the initial,9
     Farewell, familiar woods! Farewell,
     Tatyana asked. The children all
     the keys that opened up the hall.
     he reached the stream below the hill;
     Throughout their life, so calm, so peaceful,
     is known today; only a soul
     my carefree song would thus reveal
     Lensky's estate, there lives and still
     for angry heirs, as one, to fall
     they all have swarmed into the hall,
     be doomed to feel it: there's one goal
     By now the sledge is at the portal --
     {182}
     like Chatsky,5 he arrived to fall
     the mountain maiden,19 my ideal,
     then from the Muse there came revival:
     then he presents her with the scroll.
     has gone to Olga, swept the girl
     I drop my hero... I'll be truthful:
     Tatyana turned with thirsting soul:
     Though long since Eugene's disapproval
     before such playfulness of soul!...
     But now Vladimir's doubts are still:
     But he could draw a joking moral,
     Beds are made up; the guests are all
     this angel, this proud devil, tell,
     the threshold's thronged, wet-nurses call,
     ``No, no, I'm sure the party's small.
     past all the assembly in a whirl,
     let me acquaint you on the nail
     Perhaps however, to be truthful,
     and yet so light. All that is real
     packed from the maids' wing to the hall.
     and in full brilliance shines the ball.
        XL
     7 Heroine of Ozerov's tragedy Fingal.
     in his small shack, will listen well
     the cooks prepare the midday meal;
     Princess Alina. She was still
     ``It is a friend I sing, a youthful
        XL
     and walk, and breathe, before I tell
     {96}
     from early morning on he will
     the subtle spouse was just as loyal --
     Public opinion -- here's our idol,
     the Lord have mercy on us all!
     lift up the gauzes of her veil,
        XL
     {211}
     no word came flowing from his quill;
     of raging passion's surge and roll
     to Aÿ's vintage in the sequel
     for them, in Butterweek5 the greaseful,
     the cunning prisoner can quite well
     the art he'd studied best of all,
     not bad at all; and then each soul
     he trembles, knows not what to tell;
     he's happy, yes, he's almost well...
     a country house -- and one who still
     A new acquaintance claims our quill.
     in vain on my unworthy soul?
     oppressed by emptiness of soul,
     and swarming in his inmost soul.
     had won her loyalty! What soul
     is he who's never felt its will,
     The darkness thins away; but still
     and heart so tender, it can still
     and the majestic, antlered royal,
        (XXXIX,2) XL
     or cunningly create a quarrel,
     at two-ball billiards prove his skill;
     Often she halts against her will,
     and breeding ducks and geese as well,
     and teaching children how to spell.
     of other's thought -- a splendid goal;
     I know it, in the thoughts of all
     Onegin, drenched with sudden chill,
     although it's nearly heard the knell,
     Lensky, restored to his manorial
     sits there beside the window-sill!
     No hope! no hope! He leaves the revel,
     at sunken wax inside a bowl:
        L
     at any hour escape his cell.''
     and skids and tumbles down; the cheerful
     goodbye to you, my true ideal,
     ``it seems that he forgot us all.''
        L
     into an unbecoming brawl.
     a red-foot goose, weight something fearful,
     or else lifts up a fallen shawl.
     guests bow, feet scrape, and children squall.
     are old times, and the servants' hall.
     used in times past to ring a peal
        L
     graduates of the Levshin1 school,
     on goose's neck, a skull looks cheerful
        L
     a novel, vague and superficial,
     {158}
     Now, faced with this enormous revel,
     is needed, nothing's left to tell.
     over the modish word ideal,
     wished him to come and say farewell.
     Onegin has outrun us all.
     it had its epigram-potential7...
     he whirls her through the wood... a hovel
     whether from heaven or from hell,
     and sat down by the window-sill.''
     he's first to toast her in the bowl,
     of work made him feel sick, and still
     of husband's friendship -- worst of all!
     and still within, behind the veil
     of aunts and mothers, and the thrall
     with scorn to make my world a hell.
     he's called you out -- say, in your soul
     I have no leisure to recall;
     and volume three of Marmontel.
     in play with her obedient doll
     he drinks -- all shout and take a swill;
     no, quite naively I'll retell
     {144}
     or seminarist in yellow shawl!
     on dance-floor, at breakup of ball,
     we visit them, or without fail
          where can we find your equal?
     and on their captivating trail
     he dozed away; but when the real
     his Strasbourg pie, or point a moral,
     he scowls -- and the whole gang are still;
     he stood there, pensive and forgetful,
     on foot, by seven o'clock, until
     my friends, I need to pause a spell,
     without an elegiac frill,
     his thoughts were on a distant goal:
     was finding leisure's vacuum cruel;
     over his neighbour's plain memorial,
     we'd better hasten to the ball,
     in which our hero used to dwell.
     Happy is he who's known its fretful
     {148}
        XL
     what feelings would assume control
     whatever you may need, just call...
     had killed his best friend in a duel;
     with sighs unconsciously regretful.
     moonscape, the half-light overall,
     wishes his madness to the devil,
     and sink to prose's humble level:
     he'd got annoyed, the tricky devil.
     ``it's time!'' and freedom hears my hail.
     {151}
        XL
     installed in me a different devil,
        XL
     who else? -- the hero of our novel!
     as sacred, lies before me still.
     wild as a forest deer, and fearful,
     and though he liked a fiery quarrel --
     I signal to each passing sail.
     and to the vision of those mortal
     with Olga, all have pierced her soul;
     while floors would split from crash of heel,
     ``My uncle -- high ideals inspire him;
     Zizi, my crystal and my gem,
     Down there, by slow degrees, the stream
     dared clean his nails in front of him,
     condemned the millstones as a sham.
     could not conceive how solemn Grimm13
     dean of Chaldea's learned team,
     covered the golden coal -- the steam
     stretched on a sofa, calls to greet them.
     so effortlessly can disarm.
     despite herself, is Lensky's doom;
     Schiller and Goethe had refined him,
     you see the two in uniform...
     some other, older spring will gleam,
     enticing nets to do them harm.
     cherries then we'll throw at him,
     It's true, I'll not misrepresent them,
     to spoil loose paper by the ream;
     clears in a flash the freezing room;
     He roamed the world, his lyre behind him;
     that lady whose engaging charm
     But she refuses to perceive him,
     meanwhile a hallboy handed cream;
     some ladies preach from Say and Bentham,
     Semyón Petróvich, mean and glum,
     those walks amid the gloom and calm
     its barely noticeable stream.
     then later slyly he'd revile them
     16  Millyonaya, a street  parallel to the Neva, and one block away from
     adore the love that comes in dream.
     retired, as he, from fashion's stream,
     he really forced one to admire him --
     red wine in tumblers to the brim --
     impatiently on the mill-dam,
     Prince N. respectfully invites him
     from German realms of mist and steam,
     freedom's enthusiastic dream,
     the girl remains there in the gloom
     and festal evenings in the gloom.
     at soldier-husbands, and the drum.
     to look like sad romanticism.
     life's real meaning would have found him;
     a humble cross, in woodland gloom,
     the magic voices of your stream,
     dressed up a desperate egoism
     has taken on a silvery gleam;
     and redcurrants throw at him.
     Tatyana! it's addressed... to whom?
     the kiss where youth and freshness gleam;
     With womankind, the less we love them,
     the shady wood, the talking stream;
     hereditary foes they seem,
     the fear and rage with which I foam!
     far-distant heaven's vaulted room;
     Or he knew how to reconcile them
     {94}
     a grizzled Calmuck stands to meet them,
     ``There, just in front of all that swarm,
     they while away the morning's calm.
     to garden walks, as arm in arm
     grows, surges, boils, for lack of room
     a nightingale, in forest gloom,
     At home she'll equably receive him,
     a Lancer -- how she deified him!
     all plunged his soul deep in the stream
     the tighter we can stretch above them
     in midst of a poetic dream,
     the easier they become to charm,
     of a delicious, guiltless dream...
     He wakes -- and who is this who writes him?
     untirable, at sound of drum:
     and thoughts of her were what inspired him
     And our young poet -- Olga fired him
     oppressed her like a heavy dream.
     into the cups its darkling stream --
     he's a freemason too; for him,
     and as in some appalling dream
     Oh God, what did he think!'' A dream
     of evening, and those tears, the balm
     how they remind me of your stem,
     O Brenta, I'll see you in dream;
     already there she stands beside him;
     in her torn heart -- a fickle gleam;
     at length, midst children swarming round him,
     arch-commentator of the dream.
     or for that Demon4 of my dream.
     another, a more chilling dream,
     Walking? The country that you roam
     I liked his quality, the dream
     across the plain's enormous room,
     if I had power to choose your fashion --
     with a blunt cue for the duration,
     where dwelt this child of inspiration,
     her secret work of magic suasion!
     Idle again by dedication,
     Her feelings in their weary session
     had gone in no uncertain fashion
     He deemed, in general, letters vain,
     and logic; yet the conversation
     of your slim prints! though this be treason
     in dreams and cards and their prediction,
     Walking her horse in introspection
     what holds her in profound reflection,
     he's seen it all; with looks and fashion
     How often on the steep Caucasian
     How often, with her sweet communion,
     her heart had long been overrun:
     I'm yours, in a predestined fashion,
     As soon as he appears, discussion
     and then it's tea that comes to mention,
     it had no sparkle of sensation,
     I must wake up with the conviction
     and whisper ``Dunya, pay attention!''
     had filled this heart, and detestation
     Well, I must make a frank confession,
     he changed the corvée of tradition
     would not have recognized again
     how I interpret this expression:
     when our sublimest aspiration,
     Here comes the yard-boy, who has chosen
     without surprise or rage... his laden,
     and it deceived us in return;
     what odes Vladimir might have written --
     {160}
     of blind Fortuna and of men
     of Russian verse, its force in action, --
     her look, so sweetly sorrow-laden,
     and all our fresh imagination,
     and jokes and spiteful gossip ran
     At first I thought it out of season
     what dream accounts for her distraction?
     on liquor, and on hay brought in,
     on kennels, and on kith and kin,
     7 Melmoth the Wanderer, by C. R. Mathurin, 1820.
     our hapless Tanya! An emotion
     in our affair, the intervention
     of wild repentance and devotion
     of happy love. For I have been
window-panes, departed  female owner (the soul being  feminine  in Russian),
     and with a yawn took up his pen,
     it's late, time's passing... not to mention,
     or joined us poets. His conversion
     with deeds; that dunces now and then
     where fate had fixed our confrontation,
     and tried to write, but a hard session
     Of course. Yet fashion's wild rotation,
     In time, who knows, the agitation
     He got so used to this immersion,
     on Eugene's lips. In his dejection,
     his beefsteak with champagne, or drown
     With mounts from home, or postal station,
     if I'd possessed the slightest reason
     he drives up in and out of season
     and soon his travels had begun,
     at verse, and hiss an imprecation,
     I'll float in gondola's seclusion;
     he sends a letter, penned with passion.
     When progress and amelioration
     of prejudice that's never been
     in time (to quote the calculation
     once more renounces world and din.
     of his own room, how cruel spleen
     and all their ravishing invention
     I pray God grant his soul salvation,
     one sees a duck and aims his gun,
     as bonneted Academician
     O Adrian waves, my invocation;
     He followed them without illusion,
     he'll charm you with his fine invention,
     in gossip's rambling and discursion
     invariably, as time went on,
     her head in modesty cast down,
     What cause has won me your attention?
     A moment earlier, inspiration
     I know (and seek your exculpation)
     With spelling scrambled to perdition,
     a dumb moon, on a dumb horizon.''
     I was Onegin's friend that season.
     how fearful, too, is my obsession
     with fond caress? whose adoration
     a hideous deal of tribulation.
     of his Ochákov7 decoration!
     ``Whose glance, provoking inspiration,
     in Russian never found expression,
     with careful schemes of decoration
     would have been spared this laceration.
     and feel once more emotion's ban.
     were from his vision quite withdrawn.
     and pay my debt in the same coin
     he heard in stillness and in din
     works where contemporary man
     of hope and gloom, romantic-fashion,
     hope that he's had no time to fashion
     he read, and read -- no satisfaction:
     his lyre, now stilled, in its high mission
     a lady -- what a grim discussion! --
     Herder, and even at times a Russian --
     what kind of thought, what observation,
     a furious, boiling, heaving main
     with every sort of home possession:
     and at the altar, with a crown,
     her discomposure, her confusion,
     He gave this figure -- loved with passion,
     what is he? Just an apparition,
     harboured by maidens of thirteen!
     nothing was barred beyond discussion --
     In Tanya, what a transformation!
     What else? Quite drunk with love's illusion,
     how dull to work for the correction
     As, lovingly, in his confession,
     asked Lensky: ``Should we start, I mean?''
     on a fast stallion from the Don,
     was it not you, dear apparition,
     When I defected from their union
     a swift, polite reply is written.
     of tempests, in what raging ocean
     What if your pistol-shot has smitten
     and parts the fringes of his curtain;
     10 Name left blank by Pushkin.
     I know it's now in your discretion
     our kin are folk whom by profession
     a joker in the old tradition,
     {73}
     ``I write to you -- no more confession
     of the two girls; their premonition
     How dull are acting and evasion,
     with such a blissful, brief infection --
     it hurts, he laughs, and all in vain
     in which the rhymester-man-of-fashion
     Vladimir's challenge found expression
     He's neither died, nor lost his reason,
     in the full beauty of its frown;
     Vladimir to this casual mention
     is where old master took up station,
     in silence all day she'd remain
     on words of foreign derivation,
     is lost in obstinate reflection;
     were chanted, I remember when --
     And home was now their destination;
     {89}
     Up to the porch our hero's driven:
     and lovelorn maiden whom he'd known,
     a grain of gladness; tears' repression
     and once forbidden fruit is seen,
     untouched by trace of inhibition,
     good night; I swear I'll lie down soon.''
     already silvering all the plain...
     use cunning silence as a screen,
     amid the deadening joys of fashion,
     the hare who from afar has seen
     He lacked the slightest predilection
     all brought to life at your direction.
     in lives that were just dawning then.
     of hills has hid the moon; for certain
     Whatever in this rough confection
     On these, with something like obsession,
     which, listening with some condescension,
     I gave no rein to sweet affection:
     the sufferings of tempestuous passion;
     of his intent; and a reaction
     I'll gladden your imagination,
     Though belles had lost his adoration,
     that virgin dream and its confession
     immortals picked by fate for when,
     the flower-like pallor of the maiden,
     of chalk the window-panes have taken.
     God grant you took at least a grain.
     which has recalled, without precision,
     and so he lacks the strength to mention
     our terror is their consolation.
     onset of the incipient yawn,
     those words where love, without condition,
     and the derivative Knyazhnín:8
     and in the misted condensation
     The illness with which he'd been smitten
     to be the bride I'd call my own.
     And from the nearby Army station
     of philosophic isolation,
     of fate, and life, each in its turn
     thank God, he had no inclination
     Another page of recollection:
     of moralistical persuasion,
     times were, when master's least suggestion...''
     than households where the wife must moan
     he's gnawed by serpent Recollection,
     hear, once more filled with inspiration,
     No sleep, beneath that silken curtain,
     In the white heat of some dissension
     lay on the fields; in caravan
     I make magnanimous confession,
     here, seize it quick for this quatrain!)
     To talk, to general conversation
     and truffles, which have ever been
     the darling sex is light as down.
     at eighteen years, to some compassion.
     All right, you want the resurrection
     if not slow-witted, might have known.
     the guardian angel of tradition,
     3 Anton Delvig, poet and close friend of Pushkin.
     alone, and sunk in calculation,
     gives way to nature's normal passion:
     a note from Lensky; in between
     He who has lived and thought is certain
     they fluff her curls out in the fashion,
     and Werther, martyred and doom-laden,
     too long, against my inclination,
     walked homeward round the kitchen garden;
     giving the lady their protection,
     {83}
     ``Oh nurse, I'm sad, I'm sad, I'm shaken,
     in one so slothful, so hard-bitten?
     4 Hero of Mathilde, by Sophie Cottin, 1805.
     of jealous girls, devote its strain?
     {54}
     God's thunder burn you up! And when
     in indescribable elation,
     than this humiliating passion
     then on the leaves of recollection,
     he loves you... like your kith and kin!
     thought, day and night, and thought again
     for nature's unadorned reaction
     His unexpected apparition,
     Fired by the god of inspiration,
     the unmetric verses of tradition
     Italian nights, when I'll drink in
     then, on the last page, the suggestion:
     2 Lines discarded by Pushkin.
     methodical by disposition,
     we sometimes like to hear again
        Tatyana's Letter to Onegin
     Fate saved Evgeny from perdition:
     a deathless murmur from within,
     one listened to a chief of mission
     where are distress, commiseration?
     almanacs, journals of reflection,
     facing a belle I loved with passion,
     and paler than the moon at dawn,
     The kinsfolk in concerted action
     it mastered him in slow gradation;
     I grasp a stirrup with affection,
     ``Oh nyanya, nyanya, I don't question...
     the foreign words a maiden's passion
     from daybreak valleys lift the sun;
     Here's tea: the girls have just, as bidden,
     fat Pústyakov has driven in;
     and even honourable man:
     to give you honest explanation.
     on which the world is doomed to spin.
     the strangeness of her habitation,
     and trembles like a hunted fawn.
     how soon the bounds of rank and station
     The invalid's glad salutation,
     and always the self-same objection;
     about them -- nineteen to the dozen --
     to your loved ones? They do maintain
     that this of all things for a swain
     Now brooding thoughts hold his attention
     3 A statuette of Napoleon.
     had long proved tedious to distraction:
     They should be forced to read in Russian,
     On the first sheet you'll find a question:
     The princess, sitting peaked and wan,
     And foes he sees, long-since forgotten,
     the clamorous honking geese began
     a rogue, a slanderer, a poltroon,
     ``Oh nurse, a favour, a petition...''
     {95}
     and looks out on the darkened plain.
     on a small table's oilcloth sheen
     In backwoods, how d'you pass this season?
     of childish pranks: a chilled reaction
     the coach has reached its destination;
     On this we'll part; goodbye again!
     7 Fortress captured from the Turks in 1788.
     This wearisome perambulation
     and on the flames let fall unseen
     Already, in exultant fashion,
     a dream's mute monument, reflection
     The days flew past; by now the season
     this was the science of that passion
     The flirt has reason's cool volition;
     only by rule, and strict tradition
     all for our tender dreamy maiden
     alone, with no adornment on;
     for, mistress-like, it's brilliant, vain,
     the youthful lover once again
     is a compulsive bore by reason
     A pause of silence and inaction,
     Tatyana's name day celebration.
     he almost begs for absolution,
     Then gradually upon sensation,
     on modish malice, coarse of grain
     over the note holds in suspension
     and entice a fellow in
     our joy in you is warmly taken.
     wronged always in disgraceful fashion --
     I'm blind to every apparition;
     of Eugene, cold as all creation,
     of virgin fancy, and again
     then he'd implore a declaration,
     Napoleon's our sole inspiration;
     leads Olga and Tatyana on
     Pleasant, in spite of its compression,
     the rogue has got a finger frozen:
     advantages of heart and brain,
     not every day could he wash down
     The Larins kept the old tradition:
     Tatyana shared with full conviction
     are here untouched by fashion's reign,
     pride's icy calm, the combination
     no meaning in or out of season,
     I've learnt the voice of new ambition,
     To batten down their indignation
     he looks, in sweet irresolution,
     freedom and peace, in substitution
     through it they're known to me, and kin.
     What folly! and what retribution!
     after two minutes, off again,
     The sky is clear, the earth is frozen;
     and once again received a crown.
     tread the calm, settled path they've chosen...
     I trust my fate to your direction,
     he failed to join that sharp profession
     ``A humble sinner, Dimitry Larin,
     absorbed me in the recollection
     to battle further with my passion;
     pours out its guiltless frank admission,
     In passion's sluicing rain they freshen,
     for Olga, on the spreading lawn,
     present her languor and distraction
     and charming reverie's vain deflection
     a ball in Petersburg; but fun
     plunged in reflection's deepest train,
     he's viewed the boxes without passion,
     Fonvizin8 sparkled, freedom's champion,
     He reads to Olga on occasion,
     I weep, and pray for your protection..,
     in terms of poetry or passion --
     at first Madame gave him tuition,
     to sob out prayer, complaint, confession,
     4 Poet and acquaintance of Pushkin.
     The arbitrary rules of passion
     three carts -- traditional procession --
     the branches all are weighted down
     to burn -- and then by force of reason
     of Muses' offspring; sitting down
     as battles go, I've not begun;
     for friends of languor, or of fun,
     He was a good and simple barin;6
     When we draw a fellow in,
Prince P. Vyazemsky (1791--1878), poet, critic and close friend of  Pushkin,
     a free romance's far horizon,
     pouted, and swore in furious passion
     and all our modish education;
     Perhaps to improve the world's condition,
     At feasts, though, full of pert aggression,
     ``I've dreams and years past resurrection;
     to vice, while virtue got its crown.
     what held me was my predilection,
     however strongly she has been
     and yet a distant admonition
     {85}
     would talk, keep silent, laugh, then frown --
     the fateful diet; by depression
     Tatyana listened with vexation
     To face society's derision
     Protect me from such apparition
     Then Tanya hears of the decision.
     Left-handed from the habitation
     another bard1 in exaltation
     Tatyana's haunted by her vision,
     to puzzle out with some precision
     the roundest face that you've set eyes on,
     14 Author of De la santé des gens de lettres, Lausanne and Lyon, 1768.
     the festal name day has begun.
     no mannerism, no affectation,
     Perhaps some secret apprehension
     flown like an arrow, then he's given
     No, all in her was calm and plain.
     Poets, I'll say in this connection,
     that rogue, backbiter, pantaloon,
     this was our heroes' conversation
     the jug of bilberry wine is seen.1
     but looks and talk took the direction,
     fits us as if it were our own?
     to undertake their resurrection,
     Buyánov, my vivacious cousin,
     I feel a brotherly affection,
     the thought of volatile renown.
     no artifices of the vain...
     burst to a fiery blaze in season?
     5 Hussar and friend of Pushkin.
     Tatyana sees with trepidation
     There many pages keep the impression
     The nervous-tragical reaction,
     no softball for the winds of fashion,
     there caustic Shakhovskóy8 came in
     before such candour of expression,
     ``What, Grandison? oh, Grandison!
     Tanya's distress had risked detection
     What scorn I see in the expression
     I thank him without reservation,
     {115}
     But, even by accident, her passion
     ``I?'' ``Saturday. The invitation
     To reading from this odd collection
     the books then underwent inspection...
     from waxen cell the bees again
     it stood, defiant of destruction
     My friends, the bard stirs your compassion:
     the laurel in the old man's crown!
     the fleeting works of my creation,
     imagination, with such reason,
     of human friendship, holy men,
     bribe-taker, glutton and buffoon.
     Tatyana, hiding her condition,
     Like modish rhymes that lack all reason,
     her full account of voiceless pain?
     field-work, and walks with inspiration,
     ripen, and find a new expression --
     my span, that fortune's jurisdiction
     round the dim river sleep; the curtain
     Forsake, indulgent reader -- driven
     but Eugene hasn't moved; for certain
     Imagine it: quite on my own
     In time past, objects of affection
     To whom do you, from all the train
     Books, riding, walks, sleep heavy-laden,
     19 Refers  to the  Circassian girl  in  Pushkin's  poem  The  Caucasian
     But what about Eugene? With reason
     became their scrutiny's concern.
     but now the mansion is forsaken;
     {155}
     Tatyana in a deep emotion
     In duels a pedantic don,
     will anger you in its confession.
     runs after what is sweet, and vain.
     Reader, whatever fate's direction,
     that alien scene must I now turn
     because some glance of his has bitten
     A thinker in a desert mission,
     to demonstrate some signs of reason:
     to talk of this and that, but then
     or some vile agent of perdition
     till he at last was summoned down
     and read the books there on her own.
     between their girls and this half-Russian.
     my strange, incorrigible man.
     Bards of our tearful generation,
     for him all sham has found rejection,
     for her improvement, a roman,
     by Scott, by Seneca, or Byron,
     rebuffed, found instant consolation;
     He found them in some old collection,
     to Eugene; nineteen to the dozen,
     must be to hold in detestation
     trusted her without hesitation,
     {60}
     from gaol to greenwood, by such fiction
     More tolerant in his conception
     radiance of Dian, sits in pain
     bitter-sweet glory's inspiration,
     Bard13 of The Feasts, and heart's depression,
     But come, thou youthful inspiration,
by Pushkin.
     the latest fashions of the town;
     thrives to this moment, in a station
     Rage died, and jealousy's obsession,
     return an answer, blunt or keen,
     by Baratynsky's3 wondrous pen,
     reduced to sense, not without pain --
     in casual letters of confession --
     the boring wives, the ill-bred men,
     20 River  in  the  Crimea.  The  reference  is to  the  harem  girls in
     there's far too much of contradiction,
        Notes to Chapter Seven
     finding in that no deprivation --
     in music's own bewitching fashion
     But you, grand tomes I loathe with passion,
     Rousseau (forgive a short distraction)
     ``But, if you've kept some faint impression
     (I like a friendly conversation,
     they all have richly earned a pension;''
     fate could be something else again..,
     In love with fame, by freedom smitten,
     I might have said a word, and then
     11 Ballerina, once courted by Pushkin.
     Tatyana never knew the attraction
     before she goes, she seeks permission
     Evgeny, hating litigation,
     by writers of her admiration,
     that corps of social legislation --
     the spring of honour, and the pin
     How soft his glance, or at discretion
     It's true, the magnet-like attraction
     Evgeny, whom the repercussion
     into his look, the exhibition
     you see, with tears and incantation
     to raise the safety catch and strain
     to hit the target: thigh or brain.
     he saw no point in staying on,
     you find the country godforsaken;
     By contrast, in the frozen season,
     Tatyana pined in secret fashion:
     the quintessential reaction
     She's paid the sunrise no attention,
     Sign of the urge for domination:
     meticulously; in my fiction
     screened by a hill from storm's intrusion,
     the modesty of her condition,
     let not the poet's soul of passion
     But now the radiance of the moon
     a truly noble disposition;
     Meanwhile my novel's opening section
     Escaped from social rhyme and reason,
     but the salon's preoccupation
     The manor house, in deep seclusion,
     Enchanted land! There like a lampion
     to bee and butterfly unknown.
     But here, with our congratulation
     by country freedom, rightful pardon
     by what's called machinal reaction,
     swaying the artless, waiting on
     her little friends, Tatyana'd yawn,
     But, now I've praised the queens of fashion,
           Byron
     Shade-like, in purposeless obsession
     epoch's portrayed, survived the ban,
     Each day, despite the appeals of reason,
     your molten gold, your charmed infusion;
     yet floods of talk around the town...
     Even at home his occupation
     though he's unknown, there's no suggestion
     yet a capricious inclination,
     The château was of a construction
     that he's not honest past all question.''
     the poet's heart found full expression,
     Eugene forsakes the packed reception,
     whose serfs are miserably thin;
     the brilliant crackpot: this reaction
     2 Stanzas IX, XIII, XIV, XXXIX, XL and XLI were omitted by Pushkin.
     you acted well, that dread occasion,
     She enjoys the stately orchestration
     e sempre bene, gentlemen.
     the prince bring up his own relation
     the untiring city, where you've given
     I'm altering my destination
     thirty-two steps with great precision,
     with our Mamas, and a sensation
     Evgeny thought in just this fashion.
     he strove to achieve the appropriation
     but I won't praise you -- let me join
     By dreams now sad in their conception,
     to lift his pistol up. A span
     Her loving spouse with approbation
     at once they give a man the spleen.
     but salt; near the princess a vein
     levy their tribute on the plain;
     your icy look, your stern dissuasion,
     is dimmed. Down there the valley soon
     excited not a hint of passion:
     last night he'd erred in making fun,
     before the window taking station,
     yet he'd back you through thick and thin:
     He gave his arm. In sad abstraction,
     Evgeny quietly began
     So a disabled soldier-man,
     a modish second-hand edition,
     with comedies of swarm and din;
     earnestly striving for persuasion
     the universe is all perfection;
     Lensky all evening, in distraction,
     since, through the mist that dreams arise on,
     She loved the balcony, the session
     ended his wild career of fashion
     the millions of two-legged creation
     but where such hymns in my direction
     So to his wife for presentation
     before his eyes, imagination
     but groomed an anecdote-collection
     But when the hour of youthful passion
     13 Evgeny Baratynsky (1800-1844). Poet and friend of Pushkin.
     stands in dismay and indecision.
     You've guessed before it all began:
     She'll not see him, her obligation
     etcetera. But her trepidation
     but I've not got the least intention
     locked himself up inside his den
     yet people's malice and suspicion
     secure a secret assignation,
     But you perhaps find no attraction
     young traitresses by the platoon,
     you sought -- tumultuous recollection,
     in midst of trouble, storm or din.
     take wing on spite; that serious men
     the man of reverie and reflection,
     Lost in our backwoods habitation
     I'll conjure up that swooning fashion
     She wanders on without direction.
     yet, as each rule has its exception,
     sleep much, read little, and put down
     Moments of silence, quite unbroken;
     whose kindly hand will ruffle down
     When Eugene's turn for salutation
     thoughts of a girl, or as the moon
     expose his soul to an intrusion
     when, in pale sky, the stars' procession
     stays fixed and focused on a vision
     the first will never find fruition,
     the charm of what was grave and plain.
     a dwarf with tail, and a half-strain,
     I've drawn a plan and a projection,
     claiming Tatyana'd found her man;
     mother implored me; my sad station
     A sledded coach, for years forsaken,
     I would have had the indiscretion
Chapter Seven
     Now, she devours, with what attention,
     something like spleen, that scourge of Britain,
     2 Stanzas VIII and IX and XXXIX were discarded by Pushkin.
     ``So to strange kinsfolk I was taken...
     Could it not be that by convention
--------
     her husband's or the world's attention...
     something to fritter and to burn,
     so, if we want to change, we can!
     your tears would flow -- but your emotion,
     and plunged in tender shame's confusion,
     so often from her Moscow cousin
     Departure date's long overtaken;
     What sort of roses, in your notion,
     She went -- and Eugene, all emotion,
     So let me with a kind expression
     an idle monk in glum seclusion,
     All this has now gone out of fashion,
     so virtuous that, no sooner seen,
     1 Stanzas I to VI were discarded by Pushkin.
     ``Now don't suppose... let no suspicion...
--------
     1 Stanza left incomplete by Pushkin.
     He looks, and answers: ``Agafon.''4
     she appears before him, grim and frozen.
     Seeing herself as a creation --
     come, trouble my imagination,
     How fearful, in and out of season
     somehow have got the designation
     she walked across a snowy plain
     she can't make out a single fraction
     she yields to it without condition
     so, full of heart-felt tribulation,
     ``You wrote to me, and nothing spoken
     < My gaze pursues them... but on station
--------
     moves the young watcher (as was known
     don't judge the race before it's run --
     Compassion, yes, and indignation,
     At this midnight of my condition,
     she wrote in French... what a confession!
     Compliment and congratulation;
     2 Stanzas XV, XVI and XXXVIII were discarded by Pushkin.
     she drinks it like a priceless potion;
     Martin Zadéka was the siren,
     hell's terrifying imprecation:
     was one who raged and raged again,
     can't really be: for we've outgrown
     surer than friendship or than kin,
     comrades despised, and comrades rotten;
     with shelves of books deployed for action,
     craving your tolerance in season --
     when, from behind the doorway, hidden
     devoured a book with rapt attention,
     sometimes from a fair, black-eyed maiden
     arrested by the sheer perfection
     he's bowed politely; his attention
     Deaf to her sister's intervention,
     {136}
     Yet Tanya's note made its impression
     sharing her in promiscuous fashion,
     has driven off, to find his own.
     showed one a pattern of perfection
     my disillusioned glass, and yearn,
     No look, no word for him: she's chosen
     drink in the midnight benediction,
     days that are lost behind the curtain,
     her to the altar and the crown.
     in that new couch, no sleep for certain;
     so, seeing there no rhyme or reason,
     Lending his tone a grave inflection,
     dear Tanya, lover of illusion;
     a marksman crouching in the green.
     {209}
     Zaretsky rose without discussion;
     drives home -- and plunging deeper in,
     due punishment was handed down
     As with old friends, she craves diversion
     7 Stanzas XXXVII, XXXVIII and XLIII were discarded by Pushkin.
     Oh, this could all be false and vain,
     {67}
     She was alone, lit by the moon.
     Dogs, howling, rushed in her direction...
     lost them without regret's contusion,
     she sees it all. The simple maiden,
     She struck one as the incarnation --
     Zaretsky draws up a convention
     and rightly so, but now his pain
     have you read lines of your creation
     But dinner's served, so two by two
     see with their jugs the milk-girls go
     ``You yawn, Onegin?'' ``As I'm used to.''
     bed-time, and time for guests to go.
     of language which, so long ago,
     Enough, my friends; it's all so-so.
     as instituted long ago.''
     so pious, and so clever too,
     ``This time I think you've been reduced to
     and ran far off... the Muse came too.
     blooms when there's nothing else to do.
     she flies as fast as she can go;
     a frequent question: ``tell me who
     and how's Tatyana? Olga too,
     with your good offices, and so
     like irksome phantoms, null as zero.
rustic to the Russian ear''. Nabokov. See note 3 to Chapter Two.
     {183}
     I married. I beseech you, go;
     since I stopped sinning years ago.
     where did that glum eccentric go,
Chapter Two
     that night, in secret, set for two;
     the hero's name's decided too.
     thought them a pointless peccadillo;
     can chatter, and be silent too,
     her handkerchief has fallen too;
     and roused the village long ago:
     with a Venetian maiden who
     after that, supper's served, and so
     they were her only food... and so
     Who on earth is he? not... our hero?
     of grammar, Russian language too.
     made all fates look the same... and so
     have drenched the steel bit as they go
     she'd cheer my wordless way, and do
     Tatyana's heart is rent in two.
     sacred to children of Apollo!
     and on the crumpled sofa too
     ``You know him, do you?'' ``Yes and no.''
     or pine, persuade of yes or no,
     let evening pass, tomorrow too --
     Onegin without more ado
        Notes to Chapter Two
     In such an album, friends, I too
     his conscience's record, and so
     than what our sorrowing rhymesters do?
     still eats and drinks enough for two.
     is that my feet lack strength to go
     still meek, still deaf as howd'youdo,
     a soul that perished long ago,
     ``Just half a glass more... that will do...
     {69}
     as fast as post-horses could go,
     the shepherd, as he used to do,
     glitter and tumble as they go,
     ``I think I'm happy.'' Time to go,
     in Lycée gardens long ago,
     but spared no glance for Cicero;
     that self-same evening where he'd go.
     was brought there by a huckster who
     she did what nurse advised she do
     Onegin sits at table too,
     Enough, I tell you, that will do --
     out of this world will crowd us too.
     it will be our descendants who
     upon her feverish tongue; the slip
     almost as good as a dim lamp.
     though cold I am and sad; in sleep
     Only Tatyana does not sleep,
     she never even bit her lip.
     a tear for him... but what's to weep?
     the letter trembles in her grip;
     and, any moment, down he'll slip.
     wine of the Comet6 fills the cup;
     has opened up his serving-trap.
     by judgement of the modern camp
     ``Get up, my child, it's time, get up!
     from thirty down to two; and stop,
     himself just like a simple chap.
     the wine-addict adores the cup:
     {79}
     with sheer enchantment fills her cup!
     and introduced, for the last lap,
     a quilted chamber-robe and cap.
     mountains will part; below the deep,
     here's Petushkóv, the local fop;
     and human words, and horse's stamp!
     a plain, unceremonious troop,
     in flannel, and an old fur cap.
     {138}
     song, laughter, whistle, bark and champ,
     paled, flushed, or lost composure's grip --
     and good and bad are all mixed up. >
     Two hearts there are perhaps that keep
--------
     {48}
     the joys of youth, that festal cup,
     ``So let it be! for you to keep
     henceforth in front of you I weep,
     my last poor lepton for a sup!
     he arrives -- the cork goes flying up,
     the maidens all are slumbering deep.
     sometimes he'd fall into a trap
     and all the world is buried deep.
     across each bush, across each steep,
     of spires and belfries, in a cup
     the floor serves Triquet for his nap,
     will find the ice elude his grip
     over the waters in a sweep;
     in his defence, and smash it up;
     with parks and mansions, open up.
     their hand to grapple slander's cup,
     delicious novels, laps them up;
     land where I learned to love and weep,
     punctilious in his cotton cap,
     recall, by its bewitching cup,
     taken the saucers in their grip,
     bassoons and flutes begin to trip.
     land where my heart is buried deep.
     neighbours and friends in kindly group,
     my student cell: she opened up
     the heartache that they bring lies deep.
     with a small tray and a teacup.
     why, at the thought, my husband's mother
     ``What nonsense, Tanya! in those other
     myself and Eugene, lest a reader
     still as a shadow, grim and bitter;
     she never read a Russian paper,
     I drag my footsteps hither, yonder;
     she found Evgeny, eyes a-glitter,
     so Lensky answered the old dear:
     her soul's attention; just behind her
     her heartache, did it long compel her,
Chapter Four
     I would have found a friend, another,
     word on his lips, and thought: it's sheer
     made London's dandy his professor.
     A backward look is fraught with danger;
     such careless language of surrender?
     Happy a hundredfold, whoever
     would fill Tatyana from afar
           Necker
     While under the connubial banner
He was the son of the Comte de Saint-Priest, a French émigré.
     her heart had spoken, free as air,
     ``My sweet, God warrants me your debtor.''
     So the poor butterfly will quiver
     a blank default would suit me better.
     Longtime inside this modish cloister,
     and hills that delicately winter
     cold reason, sleep in sensual welter
     Who could have looked the poet better,
     2 Lenore, romantic ballad by Gottfried August Bürger, 1773.
     or did her grief soon find repair?
     of Twelfth Night's chillest, iciest air.
     Conjecture found unending matter:
     like a drunk traveller in a shelter,
     When we've retreated to the banner
     ``Olga,'' she thinks, ``what fate befell her?
     I read with secret pain, and never
     Here with his wife, that bulging charmer,
     not once a day a thought will quiver,
     it's yes or no, but never sir.''
     and the young city-bred newcomer,
     and after jealousy's grim weather
     so gloriously he'd fool the clever,
     who in the country spends her summer,
     it frankly, I'm a firm adorer
     dip in their jugs; where shadows quiver
     exists for me one special pair!
     and exclamations, and good cheer.
     some future dunce will point a finger
     Our evanescent northern summer
     Now the mazurka sounds. Its thunder
     it's like a vanishing newcomer --
     or else a novel.'' ``And my daughter
     open the window, sit down near.''
     Ladies came over, crossed to meet her,
     and Dunya works the samovar;
     and soon they bring her... a guitar
     and health, life's sweetness and its shimmer,
     of the dull shores of my disfavour,
     Lensky at home awaits the answer,
     evoke emotion's pitter-patter,
     he fed on hope's deceptive dinner;
     She hesitates, and doubts beset her:
     sought in her book, that text of danger
     is ``Kit''3 to every maiden's ear.
     now free, I once more weave together
     of Neva's proud imperial water,
     and more than once the German baker,
     on cups of coffee, and then later
     without preliminary feeler
     ``Could I just see the house, I wonder?''
     Their talk, so sound on every matter,
     my golden days when spring was dear?
     ``You pile one eclogue on another!
     toward the neighbouring valley's river.
     Here insolent prize-dandies wither
     spelt hazard, ruin and disaster;
     was Göttingen, his alma mater,
     and parted from her by their star.
     that we enjoy equating chatter
     a deft arrangement to his hair,
     with an obeisance I'll hand over...
     No, soon she changed her old demeanour:
          of seeing the world? what on earth could be better?''
     I'd nothing to attract your humour...
     what's more, I loved you; but my hunger,
     The vote was passed without demur.
     with fright, she hears the approaching bear;
     in pairs, their hunger driving stronger,
     at the same moment in her ear:
     ladies at the fireside confer,
     {146}
     has left, and no one here has met her...
     to it the people's blessing never
     ``She knows you?'' ``Why, we lived next door.''
     {139}
     He's off -- this ruthless legislator
     Drive on, Andryushka! quicker, quicker!
     Who taught her an address so tender,
     When comes my moment to untether?
     ``She's not in love?'' ``There's no one, ever.
     and bending deeply down to greet her
     ``Bliss was so near, so altogether
     You too, prime beauties in your flower
     he sleeps, away from glare and glamour,
     how brilliant with its instant tear!
     I know to what malicious laughter
     of mocking turn, or else a breeder
     I'll sprinkle you with holy water,
     Hussars on leave are racing hither
     Whether the arrow has my number,
     so nearly had them in his power.
     No, incorrect and careless chatter,
     into a corner, gently makes her
     who walks with sorrow, and with danger,
     hoar-frost and sun in freezing weather,
     led to the princess, all a-shiver,
     all stand. He walks towards the door.
     our friend Katénin8 brought to bear
     or, after some dull dinner's labour,
     servant of God, and Brigadier.''
     And yet that goddess whom I'd never
     Let's go, our friendship's worth the labour!''
     He cursed Theocritus and Homer,
     while dear Tatyana's youth grows dimmer:
     Evgeny, full of inward laughter,
     Enough. The load is off my shoulder!
     But go he won't: for him, a letter
     Ah, he had loved a love that never
     ``She's mine!'' Evgeny's voice of thunder
     Exhausted by the ballroom's clamour,
     And he was loved... at least he never
     Who'll never fault our vices, or
     as linen's brought for him to wear.
     clock in the country rings the hour;
        Notes to Chapter Four
     ``Can it be she?'' Eugene in wonder
     Onegin turns, and with a shiver
     And Ivan Petushkóv; no, never.
     she never joined, or skipped, but rather
     but the unbending goddess-daughter
     bound where the magic bow will send her,
     villages flickered far and near,
     he fled from their resounding chatter!
     deaf to the voice of your despair?
     Olinka yawned, just like her neighbour,
     still shivering in the bitter weather
     he carries her inside the door
     {65}
     each coldly plans the other's slaughter...
     simple old lady; but the liquor --
     8 Jean Sbogar, by Charles Nodier, 1818.
     Vladimir Lensky, whose creator
     I buttonhole a wandering neighbour
     Sunk in dejection, she won't hear
     just look, and never mind the chatter...
     his freedom, in his youth's first flower,
     could they not give each other quarter
     ``To...?'' ``Larina.'' ``Tatyana? never!''
     and Malek Adel,4 de Linar,5
     Killed!... At this frightful word a-quiver,
     an urge to sleep; soon, clear as clear,
     when we see him from afar,
     all day, all night, his presence fills her,
     Noise, laughter, bowing, helter-skelter
     in winter, on the cast-iron fender,
     sledges, and tardy dawns together
     even in joke the heart won't shiver.
--------
     importune with my lyre, whenever
     unseen, already you were dear,
     What do I want? what am I after,
     as gay as morning and as clear,
     Give me a pen and give me paper,
     now a protruding branch assails her
     soon a great truth came to enfold her
     unswerving friend, correct landowner,
     oh, à propos: Larin's a dear
     In heart's affairs, a sweet beginner,
     he's up the steps, with heart a-quiver
     are treated to the fullest rigour
     a novel in Lafontaine's8 manner...
     ``Another!... No, another never
     There sings the nightingale, spring's lover,
     The night has many stars that glitter,
     Gvozdín, exemplary farmer,
     her Russian was as thin as vapour,
     and put our heart into a shiver
     by waters that were still and clear,
     ``Why not?'' ``I'd choose the other quarter
     I walk the shore,17 I watch the weather,
     I'll go, I'll go!'' -- and in a stir
     {39}
     comes for awakening, comes for slumber;
     that raves with poetry can ever
     Softly the door is opened, enter
     on Finland's coast a lonely rover --
     around her neck, or when for her
     but from her shaggy-liveried ranger
     ``Look to the left? where? what's the matter?''
     grey Filatevna, to present her
     Our love is what they most abhor;
     ``How Tanya's grown! I pulled your ear
     to see the grave, and shed a tear.
     in my long task, be my upholder,
     I like to tell the time by dinner
     ``Then send your grandson with this letter
     Some neighbours there have come together;
     with his forefathers would seem better;
     her heart speaks to her even louder
     between two aunts, in pillared shelter,
     Those friends, those friends! it is, I fear,
     but brighter than the heavenly litter,
     complete with broad-brimmed bolivar,
     Tatyana seeks to attune her ear,
     He gave three balls a year, and rather
     in, past concierge, up marble stair
     But where, mid tragic storms that rend her,
     and yet in vain ennui I squander
     no fuss; our belly has the power
     ``Let's go.'' The friends, all haste and vigour,
     glitters beneath its icing-sliver;
     Grandison, cousin, d'you remember?''
     lightly attired, like the creator
     by drozhkies jaunting at full power
     At once Anisia came to greet her,
     then know that your reproving finger,
     the cabinet behind the door
     alone with him; Onegin takes her
     to a soirée. ``My God! to her!...
     ``Then, in the backwoods, far from rumour
     and shout, and make room for the pair.
     He asks. She can't accept. Why ever?
     and brandishes her tinsel splendour
     their lords, and thwack their palms together;
     The city's early sounds awake her;
     from table, clattering on the floor;
     Tatyana's letter, treasured ever
     of passion's out, and its whole manner
     Onegin knew enough to savour
     Never come and overhear
     don't waste your efforts on the air.
     Once Vyázemsky,4 who chanced to find her
     And not because she'd read him, either,
     for me to glimpse this Phyllis ever
     your chorus, is it dead for ever?
     7 Dominique de Pradt (1759-1837), voluminous French political writer.
     to kissing or caressing father
     in corners whispering girls concur;
     {125}
     It's late. A breeze begins to roister,
     the hunter in the wood will swear
     To me, unsmiling lips bring terror,
     Don't let a ghost be your bear-leader,
     for God's sake, that will do. But, brother,
     Tatyana's here, you know I've brought her...''
     oh! her young dove, the natural hearer
     long since, like brother linked to brother,
     to liven with a silk atour
     the linen stretched on the tambour.
     but, when he'd rushed to Uncle's manor,
     of secrets, like a friend but dearer,
     ``For then, Onegin, I was younger,
     and looked for Lensky, while the labour
     Moscow's the place, the marriage-fair!
     Buyánov tried -- got flea in ear.
     exercised, under lucre's banner,
     Meanwhile another new landowner
     from drowning's death in Lethe river
     is firmly cast. I don't know whether
     Eugene was free, and as a dresser
     No answer comes. He goes, for better
     She's in the wood, the bear still trails her.
     by fate's decree: this freakish stranger,
     Now Latin's gone quite out of favour;
     No ice and flame, no stormy weather
     one customary grief each hour!
     To my astonishment I've seen her,
     sometimes the evening brought together
     ditty portends a loss; more dear
     No answer comes. Another letter
     8 Francesco Albani, Italian painter (1578-1660).
     no, Tanya's more endearing far.
     add vale when he signed a letter;
     November stood outside the door.
     the girl's pale charms, her loosened hair,
     Back to his regiment the Lancer,
     squeezes her hand -- and brings to flower
     ``The Lord God be with you, my daughter!''
     she's up and flying through the air
     For it was custom that consoled her
     panes patterned by the finest printer,
     and nothing pierced his senses' blur.
     however scarlet; free from error
     Time was, he'd been the wittiest ever,
     drive on! And now we see a-shimmer
     ``Look quickly to the left, d'you hear?''
     her face would pale, she'd start to quiver.
     and from within come noise and cheer;
     Pistols are out, they gleam, the hammer
     that fell, and then began to shiver,
     and sets her gently on the floor.
     like Regulus, that god of honour,
     to whisper it her inmost prayer.
     true, with a pistol he could shatter
     The world of fashion, prone to flatter,
     The olden days, I want to hear...''
     to encase herself inside a layer
     {52}
     Love passed, the Muse appeared, the weather
     5 Lover of Valérie, by Madame de Krudener, 1803.
     Present me, please.'' ``You're joking.'' ``Never.''
     you newborn work, and like a winner
     by magic everything instils her
     Lovelace, or Grandison, or neither;
     pale transcript of a vivid master,
     Decreed in highest court for ever...
     for the footlights, this fickle traitor
     Her passion burns with stronger powder
     I'll feed the journalists for dinner
     he's at the club, a real stayer,
     Don Juan's and the Giaour's creator,
     Russia's Terpsichore, shall never
     with brilliant conquests by the shower,
     Perhaps, when thoughts are all a-quiver
     two poles that ice had glued like plaster
     After a fine career, his father
     roamed the still forest like a ranger,
     Presently Olga's ringing answer
     to mourn for Russia's gloomy savour,
     had been for ever borne off far
     I'll part them, bring them back together;
     Foes! Is it long since from each other
     His life went sailing in calm weather;
     to Evgeny. Oh, God, she'd never...
     and tea and supper; there's an inner
     the lover of Julie Wolmar,3
     In the dark sky, a shooting star
     faceted muzzles by the rammer;
     This dear, still world I must forswear
     the talk of guests when they appear;
     the doorway opened wide to meet her,
     Then with a half-ethereal splendour,
     But that's enough. My beauty's letter
     the whole thieves' kitchen flies asunder,
     the logs; the wild ones have the floor;
     Farewell, Petrovsky Castle, glimmer
     whispers some ballad of the hour,
     ``this is the one!'' Ah, ever stronger,
     Tatyana now need wait no longer.
     {150}
     So, verse and prose, they came together.
     and in the role of virtuous mother
     And someone's heart will feel a quiver,
     from deepest backwood, furthest under...''
     but just to make the bargain keener,
     rendered them tedious to each other;
     no, nothing caused his heart to stir,
     that huge ballrooms vibrated under,
     Please follow me. And here's the inner
     became like brother knit to brother.
     10 Dancer and choreographer.
     there was a general furtive chatter,
     a joking flirt, or both together,
     a wondrous tenderness. And whether
     ``The one you love's the younger daughter?''
     ``Here, near Saint Simeon; in December,
     ``I weep... In case there still should linger
     and so in winter-fields will shiver
     rushed to Anisia's room, to plunder
     having by her severe demeanour
     No moralizing from this joker;
     but your vile Helen's not my star --
     they talk of her, of how and whether:
     my inept pupil, at that hour,
     make Juvenal his text, or better
     Revenge's hour is near, and after
     your loved one, honourable reader!
     not separation's chilling power,
     he'd swim this Hellespont; then later
     maybe bore off with it for ever
     bring up a table, and a taper;
     ``Here in the winter he'd have dinner
     my soul had heard your voice ring clear,
     into the mud, a drunken goner,
     find, in the trivial, serious matter;
     sweet as a lover's kiss, and dear,
     by way of toast to their fair neighbour;
     he'd listen to the administrator;
     Dawn comes in mist and chill; no longer
     and so your faithfullest supporter
     they shove each plate, and every chair,
     perhaps -- for flattering hope will linger --
     but here comes our loud-talking prancer
     1  ``See First Snow,  a poem by Prince Vyazemsky.'' Pushkin's note. For
     ``You're married? No idea whatever...
     for the first time the Muse came near.
     touches her hand, or throws a fur
     15 Pierre Bayle, French philosopher.
     Like modish parquetry, the river
     two or three novels where our later
     the moon in its azure of air.
     fraught with enticement and disaster?
          Fare thee well, and if for ever,
Prisoner.
     My love for it is just as tender,
     it blabs, and spills them in its tracks.
     its views, its passions, or its cares!
     lions adorning gateway posts
     {152}
     {118}
     I've learnt new sadness; but in this
     In days of carefree aspirations,
     I find no sense; the truth is this,
     peasants, and fashion-shops, and sledges,
     in country towns and suchlike places
     stuff of the poet's hallowed dreams!
     then quickly something changed all this:
     lifts her from bed as it foretells
     poor Tanya more intensely burns;
     the party waits. Seized with an illness
     She's here, she spreads abroad; she stipples
     attract the sneering of the jealous,
     Zarétsky, sometime king of brawls
     {192}
     is on his feet -- in utter stillness
     straight to his stall, then turns his glasses
     into the tomb's wide open portals,
     plagued by her ghastly dream, and tries
     for 1808: his obligations
     noise in her ears, glare in her eyes...
     its pristine charm: heeltaps, and leaps,
     lorgnettes of jealous fashion-leaders,
     And what's more, they're so supercilious,
     damns the intruders; Tanya lies
     (it's all the same -- you well correct us),
     ``Qu'écrirez-vous sur ces tablettes?''
     reap a brief harvest on their furrows;
     We all resemble more or less
     Yet hissing froth deals a malicious,
     Russia's old glories and their gleams,
     the valley's dark. The forest lands
     the friends' salute she never hears
     but whispers, the guffaw of fools...''
     so circumspect, and so punctilious,
     no trace of ink, no spots, no stains.
     {76}
     your heroes, raging and ferocious,
     I suffered once from all the madness
     the guests squeeze closer to the centres;
     defeated, turned up at his neighbour's.
     Then doors are opened, Lensky enters,
     beneath bird-cherries and acacias
     for dance, and din, and worldly ways,
     (my tale's beginning here repeats);
     parks, monasteries, towers and ledges,
     that once I spent my happiest days?
     yes, these were our forefathers' ways,
     its glaring feasts, and shrill events,
     when our Zaretsky met his eyes.
     an elegy to her address,
     and though my muse may be capricious,
     for the bleak tongue of boorish clods --
     And of the cupboards, one contains
     a book of household calculations,
     But now Aurora's crimson fingers
     nor will my scribbling in such books
     with the resounding chime of glass.
     down to the garden, and her eyes
     for the sublime, and for the passions
     The protocol is all one wishes:
     your battles, lawless and atrocious,
     the jams appear in little dishes;
     but in Zaretsky he induces
     with broods of children of all ages,
     Triquet, ingenious poet, dares
     in Olga everything expresses --
     watched sun and clock -- then by such labours
     look here, as a provincial miss
     culture, so far from healing, hurts us;
     this denizen of the coulisses
     blush to descry in looking-glasses
     on this unstable life, my friends!
     flicker of swiftly twirling pairs,
     to all the most adored actrices,
     and on her lips a light smile plays.
     and, scroll in hand, before her eyes
     she lost the language of the gods
     Alone amid all his possessions,
     you object of my guileless ditties!
     {61}
     16 Author of Dialogues des Morts, 1683.
     We must confess that taste deserts us
Russian language against the encroachment of foreign words.
     the morning light no longer lingers,
1799.
     Melmoth,7 whose roaming never ceases,
     13  Author  of Recherches physiologiques sur la vie et  la mort, Paris,
     the funeral monument explains:
     has come with Kharlikov; he passes
     frontwise and back, that way and this.
     Love tyrannises all the ages;
     for us are instruments and tools;
     pans, mattresses, and trunks, and chairs,
     But friendship, as between our heroes,
     He'd given up girls -- now gave up letters,
     to comfort her in all her woes,
     what moves along the hidden ways
     {201}
     No one's, I swear by God! in sadness
     the imperturbable princess.
     12 Author of Maximes et Pensées, Paris, 1796.
     the boxes; boiling, pit and stalls;
     she visited the humble tents
     poetic in her simple pureness,
     down to the plain in turbid rills.
     project in silhouette the tops
     by any itch for marriage ties;
     ``Come to me in my golden halls.''
     to expose to Moscow fops and Circes
     am I estranged, does all that cheers,
     doubted of it, so lived in bliss.
     among the maidens and the wives,
     {153}
     with eyes aflame Onegin rises
     Here, in his red peruke and glasses,
     Strike the ditty up, my sweets,
          O rus!
     the total ownership of woods,
     But in that desert his attainments
     with bended knees a windmill dances,
     feeling is quaint, and fit for fools.
     and clasps her neck; and now she sees
     twirls the other slowly as she pleases,
     as if spellbound, Tatyana stands.
     I'm grieving still, but no more tears,
     is there to lisp its pack of lies.
     and almost swoons, and almost dies.
     cheek upon hand she softly cries
          ``A place where you'll find none of us.''
     The yard was bursting with dependants;
     the horns, and the moustachio'd nozzles --
     the tusks, the corpse's finger-nails,
     the bleeding tongues, the tufted tails,
     the eyes of all, the hooves, the snozzles,
     she finds it stifling here... she strains
     farewell you too, familiar mountains!
     is only Olga: he relieves
     and tea's brought in. Instead of chimes
     and that embittered mind which boils
     another, freakish one, who stays
     {120}
     sleep runs from her, she turns and turns...
     for whom, to expiate your crimes,
     7 Probably an allusion to Bulgárin,  an unfriendly  critic of Pushkin's
     Young ladies jump for future blisses...
     I love their feet -- though I confess
     as Sadi17 sang in earlier ages,
     What? Invitations? Yes, three houses
     Lord Byron, with his shrewd caprices,
     Tatyana looks, her faintness passes:
     in a still stream that never dries.
     Ahead of them a pinewood slumbers
     Today a mental fog enwraps us,
     feeling to what had long been heartless:
     inherited from earlier days
     critics and their capricious vogues,
     I'm wandering in a world of dreams...
     3  ``"Tomcat calls  Kit"  -- a song  foretelling marriage.''  Pushkin's
     1 Café-restaurant in Paris.
     the bear has raised her in his paws;
     3 Hero of Louvet's novel about betrayed husbands.
     O dreams, o dreams, where is your sweetness?
     as fate's mysterious purpose burrows,
     Street lamps go flashing by, and stalls,
     forgot to think of town and friends
     Let me look back. Farewell, umbrageous
     There's powdery snow up to her knees;
     for them by fathers who, as friends
     on most occasions between friends,
     And my companion, so mysterious,
     at a friend's word, a girl's caress.
     but hold my tongue, lest it appears
     shall I see you?'' As Tanya speaks
     the odious bear still grunts and lumbers.
     recalling earlier time's romances,
     she spins and, friend of winter nights,
     like fluff before Aeolian breezes;
     How well he donned new shapes and sizes --
     Some days he's still in bed, and drowses,
     dear companions, darling friends,
     There was -- --,10 so notorious
     There's din of parting now that rages,
     and on her cheeks the fever stays,
     a Russian family's old traditions;
     to lie down at her feet like slaves!
     And with a smile the world caressed us:
     Full of obedience and demureness,
     High rank, of course, and fashion's glasses,
     I still find Gallicism delicious
     its sails go flap-flap as it prances;
     friends, foes, priests, guests, inured attendants
     at first by Moscow's youthful graces
     a rest from toil and all its aches,
     But he, by sad and rocky ways,
     to wave farewell the household waits
     8 Playwrights of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
     menu, hung up for show, excites
     inside a pocket Triquet nurses,
     resigned himself to prison's ties,
     fixing an early rendezvous
     a Russian hammer-blow, repairs
     the tears in stream pour down her cheeks.
     above the dust of his remains
     in that one sound, for Russian hearts!
     aged Derzhávin1 saw and blessed us
     the only face to shake and pass
     the moon; but in the darkened glass
     ``No, every minute of my days,
     My pen, as once, no longer hurries
     {59}
     round Tanya congregate the misses,
     for Olga's beauty, Lensky gives
     with passion and with shrewd obliqueness
     All are dumbfounded. Lensky shies
     And so they lived, two ageing mortals,
     away from trusting his own eyes.
     and rest myself from earlier days.
     empty the purpose it proclaims,
     Priam-like agricultural sages,
     the heart and all its fragile dreams.
     retired, forgotten by his brothers,
     cherries throw and raspberries
     shine out and bring the world to bliss. >2
     for planting cabbage, like Horatius,
     five hundred years) for sure our byways
     From early on she loved romances,
     and whiskers -- all of this it keeps
     The choirs of dancers sought their quarters.
     rumours and threats and premonitions,
     as fresh as ever, for its graces
     at this betrayal's fateful news?
     at least by a regretful kindness;
     tracked him, and put him in duress,
     how many lines of verse, and themes
     all sorts of hopeless appetites;
     such shadowy and leisured ways,
     the simple faith of olden days
     passion's rough language talked by others,
     printed among outmoded airs;
     There, with epigrammatic neatness,
     persisted and made no amends.
     At least you then showed for my years
     and than these letters, and these tears.
     the winter's ways are smooth as glass.
     {41}
     can lean on faith, who can dismiss
     propped in the door among the press.
     Such were a young rake's meditations --
     Lensky disliked the entertainments
     the safest place for declarations,
     Ah, gently, gently, easy goes --
     and other, more exacting worries,
     my task, so vivid and so serious
     their breed would (some years after this)
     what store of riches it imparts!
     to the beginning of our days.
     by dull eternity's purlieus,
     across our snows of northern bleakness
     thank you for suffering and its joys,
     and now it's Bordeaux the Judicious
     of absence on my wandering ways!
     {55}
     {205}
     the inevitable silly asses,
     like a majestic moon, she drives
     and force that purity inspires,
     calm men with beatific features,
     for jokes, and rows, and merry dreams!
     frightening with all despair's disguises,
     the Muses' lofty arts and fashions,
     and bedbug that infest the stages
     he'll spend before the looking-glass,
     the footmen sleep on the pelisses;
     her out-of-fashion clothes!... oh, mercies!
     9  ``Lasciate  ogni  speranza, voi ch'entrate.  Our modest  author  has
     Onegin comes, and makes excuses;
     his wit, according to the rules
     he rested -- wept for by his neighbours,
     so brilliantly he'd hoax the fools,
     the indifferent, or the deadly serious!
     the children spoilt, the mad, the rogues
     till Moscow, meekly on its knees,
     as youthful sinning, or the strains
     for the two ladies at the gates.
     what occupied his chafing powers
     {44}
     but then a sudden breeze surprises,
     or just grammatical mistakes,
     {122}
     no move she makes, no breath she draws;
     an album's loose and floating sheaves.
     ``At the Larins'!'' ``But how mysterious.
     frost gleams. We watch with gleeful thanks
     And in their daughters' close embraces
     of useful objects that the curious
     fieldward, in noisy swarm, the bees.
     Nursed in the orient's languid weakness,
     the earlier griefs are what I miss.
     The comrade of so many days,
     of kindling smiles in ladies' eyes.
     adorns Aunt Helen, the princess;
     throughout the boredom of the hours --
     {97}
     right from the cradle of her days;
     to drown the hiss of modish wives.
     However has he earned so vicious,
     to scorn the men with whom he deals;
     (the reader thinks the rhyme is lilies:
     she fell in love with all the fancies
     Is it that we've become officious
     while roar of violins contrives
     No secret crimes, and no perditions,
     For goodness' sake, you can't be serious
     the matchwood chatters as it lights.
     eight rubbers; and by now eight times
     {124}
     and act the humble or imperious,
     but in it there are certain pages
     of sudden brightness... it's too curious...
     for you, I think, the humble dimness
     where (standard rhyme) are youth and fleetness?
     Europe's most finely chiselled wares
     sensitive ladies of all ages --
     {227}
     To be a butt for the malicious
     as the perfection of our days!
          La morale est dans la nature des choses.
     But the swift summer-time proceeds --
     till now our language -- proud, God knows --
     convinced at heart that my most zealous
     and junior Ensign in the Guards.
     Eugene's a pedant in his dress,
     evoke for you a sombre bliss;
     his thrusting horns, and as he passes
     a fop, a punter on the cards,
     of swooning, Tanya nearly dies;
     yes, even there its triumph grows.
     Legends, and mystical traditions,
     the atmosphere of youth and madness,
     then dress...
     {210}
     and life celestial's phantom gleams,
     {47}
     a shadow, null and meaningless,
          ``You criticize Moscow? why make such a fuss
     a Muscovite in Harold's dress,
     and from her eyes the eager tears
     although one in no manner shares
     that generations of new beauties,
     and in the eyes of the judicious
     that verse will turn to useful duties;
     the crush, the glitter and the gladness,
     and thought, a sleepy numbness steals;
     These days I'm finding even gladness,
     in dream toward the woods and plains,
     too weak to change, I'm staying vicious,
     But now our roads are bad, the ages
     oblivion of life's stormy ways,
     the ladies' calculated dress;
     and hetman of the gambling-halls,
     you've made so many secret rhymes,
     while odes have high and noble aims...''
     of ladies and of freakish fops.
     in sighs and boredom and deceits
     you learn life's sweetness, and with this
     Christmas came on. What joy, what gladness!
     or for the modishly luxurious --
     He was the slave of a tenacious,
     boys, country women, stately halls,
     the early pealing of the bells
     we'll go with her to that delicious
     (an attribute that's quite vexatious,
     will loyally discharge its duties,
     Bokharans, orchards, merchants, shacks,
     I've seen how, trustful in his blindness,
     and racking with their strain and stress
     will blossom into splendid highways:
     they're all chained up in different fetters,
     of goblets, tall and slender pretties;
     behind the door the clash of glasses
     12 French poet (1755-1814). Author of Poésies Erotiques.
     insists, when the mazurka ends,
     that could sustain it? Only grimness;
     then, help me God, she caterwauls:
     in britzkas, kibítkas and sleighs.
     and locked him in a dark recess.
     stripping my soul before your eyes!
     the snow from all surrounding hills;
     boulevards, chemists, and Cossacks,
     nonsense will earn indulgent looks,
     or make men seriously discuss
     look through the pane, and squash the flies.
     {232}
     stalking the momentary weakness,
     in boxes or the rows of stalls.
     Alas, it's not so hard to guess!
     in sledded coaches and coupés,
     and says: ``Farewell, you vales and fountains!
     I shall set out on brand-new ways
     they all still keep their old impress:
     in indolence and in rampageous
     along the street where slumber drowses,
     before my gaze began to pass.
     Along the fronts of darkened houses,
     the album of a country miss
     still dim, through crystal's magic glass,
     on the cotillion, as amends.
     brings out its faro pack, and deals.
     bespectacled, in tattered dress;
     Of those who heard my opening pages
     like native idiom from their lips?
          O, never know these frightful dreams,
     goes out into the courtyard spaces
     a raging torrent, capped with breakers,
     to pass for cultured in our ranks.
     I know too surely how it ends.
     Onegin spoke about its flights
     to play with a dishevelled tress,
     of Dian's visage, in our fancies
     no mansions, no ballrooms, no bards.
     its newness with our faded days,
     she blossomed in the graceful ways
     no proud pretentions to success,
     that fills him and in which he lives.
     across the drift-encumbered acres,
     he doesn't hear when I address
     Who'll sow no calumnies around us?
     and it's the foreign phrase that trips
     the skyblue eyes, the flaxen tresses,
     and by the sound of silly joys.
     with tears, in quarters of the maids:
     Of course, the love of tender beauties,
     I'll set two ages by the ears.
     and friend Evgeny. The princess
     objective of his thoughts and joys:
     that youthful soul, which pined for sadness;
     old mother winter at her pranks.
     no, all devoured by passion's madness
     how pleasantly the stages pass.
     Each others' and their own successes,
     by six-page letters, rings and tears,
     ghostlike, must trouble him who feels --
     no one recalls him or his verses;
     beds, bridges, lawn, she never stops,
     with an avowal just as artless;
     but from our friends, good Lord protect us!
     Yes, youth divines, in giddy madness,
     old prejudice; all men are zeros,
     lies in a coverlet that ripples
     that lives, and glitters, and endears,
     and by Repentance. All this lends,
     By enemies, no less by friends
     and tedious means to festive ends.
     and ananas, the gold of trees.
     you age, and life's just grief and sadness...''
     his soul with murmurs of distress.
     there's no ignoble tale that seems
     and jam in jars, and household wares,
     to sleep some black and empty dreams;
     bludgeon the sense; it faints and whirls.
     Whose fond attentions will astound us?
     with her own forests and her meads...
     and feather-beds, and birds in cages,
     no haughty stare around the press,
     But when a later age has found us,
     in albums, blunted the censorious
     to her flower-garden, to her novels, --
     (vain twaddle, fables of the ages,
     and soon, oh soon the storm's arrears
     the modish Record Office clerks
     in rose-trimmed bonnets, but malicious;
     the prejudices of the ages,
     {37}
     adorning all its country ways.
     gave up the ancient Kremlin-keys:
     to me so simply, with the fires
     if I show wit in jesting thus.
     the secrets of the grave, the pages
     mills, lands and waters -- he whose goods
     of Moscow in the mournful days
     or kiss the border of her dress.
     sweet talk with friends. How many days
     as smoke in azure sky disperses.
     I thought, she'll go this time, perhaps;
     some disagreeable remarks.
     the legatee of his relations --
     just what the nightmare signifies.
     then from his cabinet he'll pass
     the thoughts of my two anchorites.
     but Eugene's out from din and press:
     by now he's driving home to dress.
     brushes on thirty different scales;
     and, in the yard, stand eighteen jades.
     to happen long ago, dear readers,
     brushes for teeth, brushes for nails.
     in fact a thorough fop, no less.
     and the Skotínins, grizzled sages,
     jaws masticate as minutes pass:
     and, on the crosses, jackdaw hosts.
     ladies of riper years, delicious
     the country cottages and hovels,
     eyes rolling, arms uplifted, furious,
     the prince looks at him, and replies:
     and neighbours, followed the same ends.
     The crush, the heat, as music blares,
     ``Ah, Tanya, come to me, it seems
     or quizzing-glasses of know-alls
     the beauties in their flimsy dresses,
     the swarm, the glittering mob that presses,
     the ring of marriageable girls --
     against the tea's excessive sweetness,
     girl reapers as the streamlet flows
     your heels will squash the ladies' toes! >
     gazes at him... and nonetheless,
     through the back porch runs out and flies
     it's not in him to bring me bliss.''
     in empty deeds and futile toils.
     sit on a flimsy bench, and lays
     Just before dinner, from his labours
     {135}
     {156}
     threats, vows, and simulated fears,
     on unknown ladies in the tiers;
     of Bogdanóvich's11 refrains.
     entered his sentence in the books.
     those monkeys of the good old days:
     and from the salon the princess,
     and so the harmless chat progresses
     as when chill autumn rains surround us,
        The Song of the Girls
     {224}
     Evening, and darkening sky, and waters
     across the public's toes; he steers
     it led him, in these early sessions,
     a blessing from its blasts and rages,
     haphazard; so, to God be thanks,
          To live, it hurries, and to feel it hastes.
     although there are no streets, no cards,
     even in novels, vice entraps us,
     an ode in twenty-five cantos.
     Applause. Onegin enters -- passes
     another of the ball-dictators,
     It's time: kind-hearted, idle creatures,
     using overt or covert rules.
     Hoar-frost that crackles with a will is
     that ardent youth entirely lacks;
     a fashion-plate for illustrators,
     and trains a mirror till it faces
     unanimous exchange of looks
     upon her lips the breathing dies,
     how envious was I of the waves
     and up the rustling curtain crawls.
     addressed to Tanya, certain verses
     our deep economist had got
     all's well; the destined hour at last
     It baffles me. But I'll repeat
     ``Go, nurse, and leave me here apart.
     the lust for blood drew them apart?
     they shared their days in deed and heart,
     against each other swift, small feet.
     after Saint Chariton's gone past
     unconsciously he let it mount
     on her conquest, we leave my sweet;
     in his first dream of passion's fruit,
     {50}
     and I be by the world forgot;
     glitters with hoar-frost all about.
     madman, can you forget their print?
     the two foes stand with eyes downcast.
     again I see your soulful flight?
     upon it, and with head down-bent
     1 Gavrila  Derzhávin  (1745-1816), ``Russia's first outstanding  poet''
     he drives there like a bird in flight,
     and yet inseparably present,
     {179}
     by clearing every sort of debt;
     I put your genius to the test,
     The rustic sage, in that apartment,
     of ladies' heads, and ladies' feet;
     to feasts and fun this winter past;
     Believe (as conscience is my warrant),
     killing each evening off like that?''
     Tanya looks on; her own indictment
     she roams the empty garden-plot...
     a sham that trustful souls work out;
     in the far backwoods' deepest heart,
     saw through the window, morning-bright,
     the wild rose blooms, and in the covert
     {71}
     you gave me such a shocking fright!
     of jealousy has made her start,
     and strip the forest round about.
     a faster, stronger pulsing start.
     girls often change to their contentment
     the year, his age, then: ``may your rest,
     across the stage; he yawns: ``Ballet --
     outside and in they star the night;
very briefly -- to a  controversy between different literary  cliques  about
     if her cross mood was at its worst --
     in the deep stillness of the night,
        Notes to Chapter Eight
     in solitude, as at the start
     blinded to everything about
     his young heyday's supreme employment,
     but now I've rather lost the art.
     his parents' patriarchal dust
     my tongue kept drawing from the heart --
     Eugene as clever, and quite sweet.
     {66}
     I'm grateful now with all my heart.
     Or from all notion of enjoyment
     Already borne down by regret,
     of rugs, and carpets' rich refinement.
     to drain its beaker down, nor thought
     the homely scene, take pleasure in it --
     and then concludes: she loves him yet!
     late of Tambov, Monsieur Triquet
     Onegin too. ``Good Lord, at last!''
     just like a casual guest who might
     ``Gladly.'' ``So when?'' ``Why not tonight?
     or dim her, dazzle as she might.
     Oh, I've no strength... I'm tired, my chest...
     still everywhere the lamps are bright;
     they'd just enrage it with their dart.
     she looks, the room is getting light --
     6 Vintage 1811, the year of the Comet.
     or stirring annalistic must;
     blue smoke of chimneys goes aloft,
     A ball: the joy of every guest!
     the neighbour... you must tell the brat
     But was it happy, his employment,
     Tatyana heard Evgeny out.
     its work, its torture, its enjoyment,
     {167}
     opens the door a tiny slot...
     and kisses smack as young girls greet;
     This world's so vacuous that it's got
     to steal away her neighbour's light
     still made of tulle, the self-same bonnet
     you'll read: here's Pradt,7 here's Walter Scott!
     {197}
     active, and hopeful, and insistent:
     to hear him howl: ``that's me!'' You'll get
     a young girl's looking-glass is kept.
     in other things you come off best:
     and home he drives, deep-sunk in thought.
     with deep emotion looks about
     I'll save this blossom on the shoot,
     ``Goodbye, Onegin, time I went.''
     this child of luxury and delight.
     and to it, with a grave import,
     now as before, inside my breast;
     the stars, the moon -- celestial light
     now crush with sorrow's dull deployment
     o fields -- to you I'm vowed at heart.
     of distant countries, of moonlight...
     is dear to me, for it has brought
     and should have played a different part:
     and your sincerity of thought
     or Russia's chondria, for short;
     has fixed; but for my heart to beat
     Then verdicts from her husband's quartet
     before which life's horizon yet
     on me, all this has no effect:
     Was it not in such sweet employment
     and where had he arrived from, not
     your grief would fail to touch my heart,
     not only pain, too much to meet...
     where a sharp nail has made a dent.
     shutters are opened and the soft
     Tatyana hears but takes no part;
     The World found this enough to treat
     of social buzz and modish riot,
     And how they weigh! I know about
     she sits with head sunk on her breast,
     even by Ladies' Fashion Post,
     their hopes, their pranks, their dreams at night --
     Now Nature's tremulous, pale effect
     after her own room, makes her fret.
     onto the porch, and fussed about
     of life's repast betimes, nor sought
     has felt time's desiccating blast?
     5 Hero of Griboedov's Woe from Wit, 1824.
     how well he knew the way to hurt --
     and every plea that lips can treat;
     get two young friends to pick a fight,
     by decent company, has not,
     of Tanya's image... Ah, how great
     {173}
     of her own horses, not the post,
     and yet in her you'd not detect --
     he danced attendance with the best;
     one thing inspired his breath, his heart,
     the Russian for le comme il faut.
     not to see Olga; in a fret
     and good and ill, and learning's fruit,
     her kindness, move Tatyana; yet
     youth which has nothing to regret,
     But now! what brings you to my feet?
     of simple product supplements it.
     now sweet, his slumbers are distraught.
     Tatyana3 was her name... I own it,
     that, for all this, my shame's report
     or languid bosoms; and no visit
     for her instruction, and her breast
     and, as observer, to be present
 Feb 2001 10:50:30 GMT
     Their look, though, shows no change upon it --
     with bursts of passion from the heart,
     and when, by misty moon, the east
     by will of Zeus, the high and just,
     on state affairs; there was a wit,
     in your calèche of foreign cast --
     by some perverse schoolboy for sport;
     And he remembers, in the quiet
     one leads the multitude in thought,
     it would be painful to depart
     what flowers of spring display your dint?
     that Lensky and Eugene, apart,
     flits Olga: ``now, tell me straight out,
     and cared not what his daughter kept
     one finds in war amusing sport,
     earn us the favour of the Court?
     in the salon new faces meet,
     Today it's turn and turn about.
     11 Count Emmanuel Sen-Pri (1806-1828) had a reputation as a cartoonist.
     among the neighbours round about.
     she flails around, she tries to shout --
it.
     need not have bristled like a beast;
     with censure -- I've done all to earn it!
     last many a day, and many a night!
     of sense and judgement. For his part
     amusing, flattering with the best,
     sent at the Colonel's own behest.
     with visions of enchanted night,
     My early bird! you know, last night
     his serfs rejoicing at their lot.
     the sumptuous palais shines out;
     by Neva, on a summer night,
     have pushed their frontiers further out,
     18 ``The  author, on  his mother's  side,  is of  African  descent...''
     He opens up a door. What's that
     Worse luck, Larina crawled; the employment
     once more, at that beloved sight,
     the happenings of the previous night;
     spared her the expense she dreaded most --
     without a trace of spite or plot,
     into a small quit-rent -- and got
     Where are you? come -- and my own right
     choruses, Tanya can but wait,
     seacoast, to hear in dark of night
     two pines have tangled at the root;
     to catch the eye and to attract.
     the gift of recognizing what
     tradition still keeps my respect.
     You too, mamas, I pray attend it,
     a glossary of smart argot...
     heaven's will -- for you I'm set apart;
     ladies who glide on waxed parquet.
     At first, disparity of heart
     and granite, were so far apart.
     for raking up historic dust
     who, in good time, would calmly get
     his foolish face; more pleasant yet
     the darling objects -- don't you know it? --
     covered her face. When all came out
     a secret truth, and at our cost
     a life-creating voice was lost;
     Alas, our youth was what we made it,
     smoothe his way out with humour's ointment.
     {154}
     when hourly we ourselves betrayed it,
     {43}
     it may be late, but it's a start.
     and self-oblivion was his art!
     the one who killed the youthful poet?''
     a simple Russian family night:
     the big room, further, not a cat.
     I've paid my due to classic art:
     now disenchanted with the next,
     as if a cold hand squeezed her heart,
     Olinka and her mother sent:
     takes up an hour or two; at last
     once more the love, once more the smart...
     and watch your daughters closer yet,
     the uncertainties within his heart;
     No matter; fate's decree is just.
     condemns the monde and its excitement;
     at forty he'd have got the gout,
     in the mazurka he was light,
``for reasons of censorship'' because, as Nabokov explains, ``tsars were not
     converting morning to midnight,
     their looks and language in deceit
     2 Count F. P. Tolstoy (1783-1873), well-known artist.
     and has no knowledge of deceit?
     Evgeny loved him from his heart,
     to pass the evening. No? then tot
     husband and father as my lot;
     and ruled him like an autocrat --
     that youthful heart. ``But now at least
     and satisfied with what he'd got,
     {142}
     in your pursuit I've come to know it:
     I acted thoughtlessly or not:
     on ballroom's looking-glass parquet
     of certain ladies' tiny feet.
     (a simile of this and that)
     young poet, be for ever blest!''
     the blood within my withered heart,
     a simple monument is built.
     a nation's wealth is, what augments it,
     and plaits a piebald shoe of bast;
     of the Terpsichorean foot.
     and just a double charge of shot
     to horror-stories told at night
     may wind up my career as poet;
     Listen to me without resentment:
     we'll draw it deeper in our net;
     even to count them throws me out.''
     with lampions studded all about
     and prone to censure in our thought;
     through distant regions of the heart...
Chapter Eight
     you loved the opulent contact
     another's joy, another's breast,
     {101}
     My heart awaits you: you can turn it
     From widow Clicquot and from Moët,
     repeats what her mama has taught.
     and with a sigh I now admit
     more and more bored by yearning's text,
     Tatyana'd rise by candlelight.
     {100}
     remains unmoved: still he's persistent,
     and fatherland and grim confinement?
     all these are charming! but to put
     {228}
     his itching verse, Monsieur Triquet
     in all the world could take my heart!
     Then, crying, they untwined my plait,
     came driving to his country seat,
     you took an honourable part --
     the heart of the professional flirt!
     as well-read, though of pedant cast.
     liven the drowsing of my heart,
     and fastens, like a term of art,
     prince, who in that dark-red béret,
     sent to seduce? Resolve my doubt.
     was just created for the part.
     in fact by some quite different thought.
     its grip on him, forgot to count
     and with a halting, trembling gait
     humbly I heard your lesson out?
     attainable!... But now my lot
     and every man won't understand it
     should have been analysed when caught,
     on the highroad the wolves come out;
     fire of the cutlets' scalding fat,
     pen, tears, and rhymes, and all the rest?
     with trees decked in their silvery kit,
     you're sure to find her portrait in it:
     has never staked his family seat.
     of fallen glory. Well! don't wait,
     It's right and proper that you went.''
     With a sharp epigram it's pleasant
     I'm good for nothing now, my sweet...
     first, we'll take vanity, and let
     his housekeeper and her department
     sing God knows whom, compose with art
     made over to them his whole lot,
     poor girl, to drop into a faint,
     frozen in his tight-fitting suit;
     finds her alone, and there they sit
     to clasp your knees, and at your feet
     shall my sad gaze no more alight
     and the blancmanger, then a fleet
     so unforgiving a report?
     to stem the bloodstream's wild outburst;
     Her frightened cry brought running out
     the household boys in noisy rout;
     I ask you, each and every poet!
     her nerves, she leant on it her weight,
     who on a deuce, that famous cheat,
     of sumptuous flowers and luscious fruit.
     She looked across, felt in her heart
     in winter was her heart's delight.
     no magic fancies of the poet,
     in which his hero's mould was cast.
     and, curious now about the lot,
     or borrow, say, from me, if not.''
     suspecting wonders would come out.
     to pine away from passion's thirst,
     something to rack his brains about,
     Alas! the generations must,
     and enviable for a poet,
     and gave our heroine enjoyment
     are just as nimble as their feet.
     in showing how to tell apart
     there's a small window shining in it,
     without a word Tatyana leant
     sing about something else at last!''
     from their own country? Then she shot
     with Guillot; while pourparlers last
     about what's buried in the past:
     darkly above the water's lilt,
     to each and every raving feast
     or else... or else, may God forfend it!
     that somehow that same day we'll meet...
     drunk, eaten, yawned, grown weak and stout,
     or of Istómina, my sweet,
     the days that doom has measured out.
     the ardent author of the past
     his dreams, while she whom they're about,
     it lacked, of course, poetic heart,
     as horses whirled him through the dust.
     have been a fool; yet he'd a right,
     and faithful wife I'd have been cast.
     Tatyana struggles to run out --
     can it be true you must await
     rigorously though you'd inspect --
     and in retreat from all enjoyment
     her steppeland charms into a rout.3
     let's go together, take a rest...
     their tendency to call, and sit.
     solitude, stillness and the night,
     bathed in the moon's inspiring light.
     Tanya today goes hurrying out
     no, forests are the sole retreat
     blest the poor lover who reads out
     can it be true, their crown at last
     demanded. ``Yes, she looks... And yet...
     Tanya comes to in utter fright...
     blest... though perhaps her fancy's caught
     for the young pilgrim. So at last
     and every day its own enjoyment?
     with sabre's slash, and bullet's blast.
     whether it goes careering past,
     come to disturb me and affright.
     {184}
     The book displayed, not so you'd know it,
     and beat a nacreous wing when caught
     to all this tattle, yet at heart
Популярность: 69, Last-modified: Sat, 10 Feb 2001 10:50:30 GMT
     but held up by the simple fact
     she treads our earth, and how her breast
     We've many neighbours round about;
     despite herself, rehearsed the part:
     ``Your modish world, I'll do without it;
     and evening now drew on in mist...
     wedlock for us would be abhorrent.
     the marriage plans were all exact
     What of it? it's euphonious, pleasant,
     who was it that you dreamt about?''
     ``You're wrong.'' ``But what I wonder at
     to the Larins' had caused a spout
     it's hidden deep in gloom and dust.
     of hope sometimes disturbs my heart;
     yet he fell out of love at last
     in their gay glass, the borrowed light
     she burst into a coughing-bout.
     and jolly magpies on the flit,
     13 French encyclopedist.
     study where he would sleep and feast
     ``One winter's worth, you've surely got;
     and cheers salute him. Tanya must
     flown from society as we know it,
     wound that had seared my Tanya's heart!
     the new ballet he should be at.
     all others with a waistcoat's set
     and sang me to the altar-mat.
     cartoonist-pencils of Saint-Priest;11
     of philosophic brains, about
     full of his usual pith and wit,
     3  ``Sweet-sounding Greek names like  Agathon... etc., are only current
     once more he can't await the night;
     ran through the fields, sheer panic fright
     when he arrived; not in the slightest:
     sharpness of wit, and social art,
     that Menelaus was quite right --
     in frosted bottle, for the poet
     the hat, the scowling brow, the chest
     smile, voice and movements, little waist --
     ``Make way, make way,'' goes up the shout;
     to freedom, softness and enjoyment:
     but never asked her husband first.
     fly to my corner like a dart,
     but where are all your evenings spent?''
     They will receive us with delight.''
     amidst the howling and the blast
     startling the ingenuous with a jest,
     from day to day she could but wait;
     In second place the poet might
     With that, in tears, and quite worn out,
     deceived, was overjoyed to rest.
     some minutes long. The words won't fit
     dreams of inconsequential cast,
     nor turned a poet. In the burst
     so all went smoothly after that.
     but will, and reason's strong constraint,
     the wilful fancies of the heart.
     by way of secret tome that slept
     would Hymen bring us -- blooms that might
     and, when one's least prepared for it
     found for its utterance that night.
     the hostess cries and, moving fast,
     wakened at the same hour of night
     the vital force gives them the shoot
     by my Eugene, not for his heart,
     {42}
     with cranium aching fit to split;
     {219}
     in which, dear friends, we're all afloat!
     down from the porch, light as the lightest,
     and sat there as the minutes crept;
     her seal with its engraven crest.
     my wretched Lensky in his heart
     may chorus, when she comes in sight,
     she'll spin this way and that, and beat
     drawn from a dim, warm-hearted past,
     the girl's attentive eyes are bent.
     is it that she, poor simple sweet,
     sorceress-winter's here at last.
     I have to drag my feet to it.
     {191}
     quickly to O... I mean to that...
     shall not attack my lily's root;
     In this, dear reader, if you know it,
     Now all was still. Tatyana slept.
     {130}
     with pleasure on his vengeful act.
     before first light they have appointment,
     {200}
     for him, the objective on life's chart
     will in a flash decide his lot.
     but, lovely maiden, wilt thou not
     5 The week before Lent.
     Tsimlyansky wine, between the meat
     my life in a domestic plot;
     {177}
     there, where the coulisse entrance went,
     do fields echo with work and shout;
     ``I don't see what's so bad about it.''
     Madame de Staël, Bichat,13 Tissot,14
     a full confession of the heart.
     {204}
     but it's the first time you'll have known it,
     it held me captive; tit for tat,
     no spark of fun in all its rot!
     into the social whirlabout;
     passion and dreams of pensive cast.
     in everything she sees there's not
     the world and all its works, she wept
     thank him by curtseying to the dust;
     her path a hare in headlong flight
     in first place -- listen, am I right? --
     that's where my years of youth were spent.
     in fashion's din, at still of night,
     he ended even your employment;
     throw meadows into muddy rout,
     I would have chosen none but you
     devouring Gibbon and Rousseau,
     "When will the devil come for you?"''
     Friendship, as I must own to you,
     3 Julie, ou la nouvelle Héloise. by Rousseau, 1761.
     really more bearable to you
     And now, my friends, I hear from you
     {35}
     You husbands, deeply I respect you!
     I'm at your service to protect you;
     spoke words of hope? But who are you:
     secretly overheard by you.
     or something tenderer still, for you.
     ``But I'm denied this: all for you
     ``Well, I won't hold you up or bore you;
     ``You're off? why, there's a poet for you!''
     But now -- oh God! -- the thought of you,
     She faced him, questioning: ``But you?...''
     of Richardson and of Rousseau.
        XXXV
        XIV
           Dmitriev
     Gvozdín, Buyánov, Petushkóv
        XV
        XXXIV
        XXXV
        XXXIV
        XLV
        XXXV
        XLIV
        IV
     and look, my cousin's come, Buyánov,
        XXXIV
        V
        XLV
        XLV
        XV
        (XIII, XIV,) XV
     10 Magazine (1818) edited by A. Izmaylov.
        XLIV
        XXIV
        V
        V
        IV
        XXXV
        LV
        V
        XLIV
        XXV
        XV
     proclaims where ponderous Pústyakov
        XXXV
        XIV
        V
        V
        XIV
        XXV
        XV
        XXV
        V
        XLIV
        XXXIV
        IV
        XIV
     over the Petersburg pavé --
        XIV
        XXIV
        XXXIV
        LV
        XXXV
        XXV
        IV
        XXXIV
        XXIV
        XLIV
        XV
what he can do.'' Nabokov.
        XXXV
        XLV
        XIV
        XXV
     and counsellor (retired) Flyánov,
        XXIV
        IV
        IV
        XLV
        XXV
        XLIV
        LIV
        IV
        XLV
           Griboedov
        XXIV
        LIV
        XXV
        XXIV
        XIV
        XXXIV
        XXIV
        XXV
        XXXIV
        XXIV
        XV
        XXXV
     {74}
     he gazed out on the threatening glow.
     I'll say: with past ideals in view
     Proud Albion's lyre is what I follow,
     until the dawn beneath her pillow.
     Guillot, behind a stump in view,
     {163}
     the pages of some dull review,
     Reader, the elder sister now
     Tanya to all her kin. My sorrow
     bear, blackness, blizzard, bridge and crow,
     of pity: in his silent bow,
     a soul that nothing can renew...
     forgot. Its trodden path is now
     The better to dispel her sorrow
     and with the decorous throng to follow
     and in his look there shows somehow
     of ardent speech, that aching flow
     It's agony to watch the hollow
     with each nuance of wintry glow:
     the man who laid her brother low.
     I gave my word, alas, though now
     how to engage in talk that drew
     must now employ my pen; somehow
     and flown like arrows from a bow.
     her clever husband on the morrow
     to Olga's face, he whispered low
     fir, forest, hedgehog, raven, snow
     to see you, faithfully to follow,
     a parodistic raree-show?
     Onegin swiftly came to know
     has painted for us the first snow
     must be my theme, if you'll allow.
     and crisply crunch the morning snow.
     to us, though, not exactly new.
     a cheerful glimmer on the snow
     I only write like this, you know,
     and watch him stubbornly bring low
     that one be shot just anyhow --
     and, still transparent to the view,
     Why then do you pursue me now?
     Ah, all that my Onegin knew...
     with eyes of love, with greed to swallow
     I've run a mile, I must avow,
     the Corsair, or the Wandering Jew.
     Maidservants on the beds just now
     too long he's hoaxed us high and low...''
     only in January the snow,
     lest signs of casual weakness drew
     {72}
     and finds the world a darkling show?
     the jagged flint's pulled back anew.
     we'll talk, and talk, and then we'll show
     {171}
     the altar flame's extinguished now.
     but she (for women, that's not new)
     at some dull aunt's, sat down and knew
     having decyphered on their brow
     than most. Evgeny, though he knew
     and empty gossip, you'll allow,
     My soul's like crystal, and tomorrow
     with the unmistakeable sideview
     twin lamps of serried coupés throw
     thank you indeed. Alike in sorrow
     a classicist, he'll not allow
     {195}
          ``How can one not love mother Moscow?''
     and like an arrow from a bow
     and underneath her downy pillow
     ancestral1 portraits met the view
     along the street lies dirty snow;
     ``As for the other one... tomorrow
     and autumn lingered, long and slow;
     {169}
     She's dropped her sash's silken billow;
     to hide a hope, to make a show
     already yawned before the show,
     and little dancing whirls of snow
     and in the morning wouldn't know
     neighbour was sure, from this would flow
     as by the shortest way they flew,
     to Tanya, all's an empty show.
     of lovelorn girls was nothing new?
     ``It's nothing.'' And away he flew.
     Shishkov,6 forgive me: I don't know
     that, like proud Byron, I can draw
     now I've forgotten all I knew.
     lived to the age of twenty-six;
        XIX
        XXX
        (VIII,2 IX,) X
        XXX
        XXIX
        XXIX
        XIX
        XXX
        LIX
        XX
        XIX
        XIX
        XX
        IX
        XLIX
     long life to our dear friend, Bordeaux!
        XXX
        IX
     of that old duellistic fox,
        XX
        XXIX
        IX
        XIX
        XX
     beyond a string of dull tableaux,
        XIX
        XX
        (XXXVIII) XXXIX
        XX
        XLIX
     without a goal on which to fix,
        XX
        XXIX
        XXX
        XIX
        XXIX
        (IX,2) X
        IX
        LX
        IX
     that wicked, loose-tongue chatterbox...
        XXIX
        XLIX
        XXX
        IX
        XXXIX
        XXX
        XIX
        Notes to Chapter Six
        XXXIX
Chapter Six
        XXIX
        XXIX
     {128}
        XLIX
        XXXIX
        X
        (XXXVIII,2) XXXIX
        X
        X
        X
        X
        XXXIX
        XXX
        X
        XX
see also Chapter Seven, XLIX.
     treated his lessons as a ploy.
     I'd love you, but inside a day,
     grey-haired and weak, beneath it only
     and then, indoors the livelong day,
     like mindless youth, the waltz goes by
     of finishing its book, but early
     in flowers of spring it's drinking dry:
     All Lensky's thoughts went hurly-burly,
     Onegin still is slumbering deeply.
     and look serenely on your beauty!...
     a ball here, there a children's party;
     a shambling hoof along the way;
     this modish whirl, this social story,
     ``To me, Onegin, all this glory
     though we... don't shine in any way,
     two hearts, a torch, and a nosegay;
     it needs no gold if a supply
     It all seemed new -- for two days only --
     of old-lime hospitality.
     to fresh grandparents every day.
     an ace a dozen yards away;
     How many times I made a toy
     ``he dandled me as a small boy.
     and bliss for him is when he hotly
     {174}
     ``It's nothing, nurse, nothing, I say...
     for witty; in his Gallic way
     that languid beauty, listens nicely --
     They take her too to the Assembly.
     they leave their shores and fly away.
     the blaze of candles, and the trembly
     or on the granite of the bay.
     are almost bursting; she's quite ready,
     Alas, Eugene beyond all query
     to boom, to flash across the sky,
     to captivate, and then to fly.
     tomorrow just like yesterday.
     Onegin, d'you recall the day
     thickly the exclamations fly.
     Only the ode, that solemn story!
     The two old ladies kiss and cry;
     and dreamt that she with him one day
     along Tverskaya Street already
     and while the star still flew, she'd hurry
     Onegin was assessed by many
     and held him briefly in their sway,
     until the tombstone; there one day
     the potholes make the coach unsteady.
     I've known too many a haughty beauty,
     lately he married off his boy.''
     Tatyana's love is no by-play,
     {196}
     {123}
     inexorably wed to duty,
     {86}
     go off to sleep quite hale and hearty,
     in dark attire the new-born day.
     in unison repeat the cry:
     girls as they passed her spoke less loudly,
     visit the family, what d'you say?
     jointly would tread life's humble way!
     just send your grandson on his way.''
     O spring! o time for love! how sadly
     {198}
     and how a country lives, and why
     The fire was dying; cinders faintly
     Why have you gone all pale and queasy?''
     tumbled and whirled and twisted quaintly
     Take Olga's shoulders now -- the beauty!
     across to her consort a weary
the relative merits of the classic ode and the romantic elegy.
     of children, though as young as they,
     herself not knowing how or why)
     or mother; and in all the play
     the cold perfection of the sky,
     as pair by pair the dancers fly.
     praised his fierce courage in its day:
     the grand barouche is on its way.
     14 Pushkin leaves blank the name of Onegin's model dandy.
     with old Anisia. The next day
     prevailed, and with composure steady
     fail to perceive -- that's by the way).
     ``Why did you visit us, but why?
     once more Corneille's majestic story;
     pronouncing through her nose politely
     like a sweet child. She'll never say:
     and then sat silent all the way.
     is the supreme reward. Precisely,
     and no one in the room so proudly
     ``My goodness, how the years do fly!''
     {104}
     addressed to Onegin''... ...'Well, that's easy.
     He smiled as Lensky talked: the heady
     his mind, in judgement still unsteady,
     lacing her stays up very tightly;
     and leave no faint footprint of glory...
     alarmed by my melodious lay,
     8 Nina Voronskoy, imaginary belle of Petersburg society.
     ask Tanya out to dine, and they
     All flourishing; they send their duty.
     or, sweeter, like a butterfly
     forgotten features. ``Can you say,
     and never stir a foot away!
     at my famed portrait and will say:
     9 Actress in tragedy.
     he was a poet in his day.
     the expanse of fields, so wide, so lonely,
     his hours to dreaming them away:
     looked on a river: far away
     pretty maidens, romp away,
     We each enjoy a special hobby,
     fortune, and dignity, and glory,
     on Christmas Eve, he wished me joy:
     But onward, onward with my story!
     Onegin's life, you see, was holy;
     in others' houses she may say
     who late at night are whirled away
     I meant to paint, with Alban's8 glory,
     would say goodbye and drive away,
     the guests are feasted, good and hearty,
           Prince Vyazemsky
     to dreaming given up unduly,
     in far Moldavia, fit for pity,
     there Didelot10 crowned himself with glory:
     will give you a complete reply.
     at fifty, would prolong the story
     17 Persian poet of the thirteenth century.
to be mentioned in so offhand a way''.
     Alas, on pleasure's wild variety
     to sing of others must imply
     in order daily, chez Véry,1
     to the empty homestead made her way,
     who'd sit, and at the end of play
     past ice-blocks, blue and squared away,
     and, as the years went by, who duly
     By now the sun is climbing steeply,
     is this -- one sees from here the party:
     with a quick look perusing lightly
     Right at the outset of my story
     will halt her horse and, gripping tightly
     {117}
     What breasts! What soul!... We'll go one day
     {49}
     to high renown my doleful story,
     bright summer days that passed so slowly,
     where, in a cab, and furious hurry,
     with care Zaretsky stows away
     what London calls, with humble duty
     ``You don't see what to do? that's funny:
     for in our time, beyond dubiety,
     Yes, spleen was waiting like a sentry,
     for your enlightenment to say
     3 ``Rout (Eng.),  an evening  assembly without dancing;  means properly
     all egoistical and dry,
     But not today. Although I dearly
     ``as sung of old, in years of glory,
     is deep in love, just like a boy;
     Then, plunged in the housekeeper's day,
     {161}
           Baratynsky
     and he believed his friends were ready
     But, in a fearful huff, his thrifty
     before it was the golden play
     ``Farewell, you realms that own the sway
     reluctant to exhaust the boy,
     and read my Apuleius keenly,
     but Tanya found she couldn't cry:
     But you're not sociable, they say:
     Onegin had no word to say;
     to reasoned talk, no dull hearsay,
     Why, pretty one, you're up already!
     boredom has just as sure an entry,
     Lensky had a curt word to say
     battling along that watery freeway,
     Beneath storm's vestment, on the seaway,
     on features known, but to that dreary,
     5  ``A  deliberate  accumulation of  conventional poetical  formulae by
     the giddiest hope, carefree and gay,
     the same as any other day.
     with perturbation and with worry;
     the rosy bloom that glowed so newly
     No word: another day goes by.
     Your horse, blunt-shoed and all unwary,
     even if he drops or pines away.
     though what's romantic here I simply
     have your fill of revelry!
     Today... the sad memorial's lonely,
     ``My dear good sir, I'm short of money.''
     when little notes come on a tray.
     but now, thank God, you're well and steady,
     You'd never class her as a beauty;
     where shall he go, my rogue, my hearty?
     I lack the strength required to say
     with gown and slippers; tearing hurry,
     always monotonously gay,
     But then, oblivious of the city,
     Eugene had no wish to betray
     struck for Evgeny, with its play
     and in my soul, o spring, how madly
     Blest he who in his youth was truly
     another's grin was sly and shifty,
     her grief, and nearly ran away.
     But, did they not corrupt society,
     was undiscovered to that day.
     who swaggers in with the reply.
     and she, submissively, inertly --
     bored with hilarity, and weary,
     brooding that is the lover's ploy.
     and there, beneath your noonday sky,
     never come and like a spy
     before him roast beef, red and gory,
     how are your kith and kin today?
     wanders in a distracted way
     That isn't our immediate worry:
     they met on horseback; quickly they
     each of us has his favourite lobby:
     watch the games we maidens play.''
     then liking grew, then every day
     Yet the mazurka keeps today
     Blest he who's left the hurly-burly
     So Lensky wrote, obscurely, limply
     with custom, love would fade away;
     she can't; and in her panic hurry
     (critical judges, strict as any)
     Capricious belles of grand Society!
     though I'll come back to him, yet clearly
     to see life as a ritual play,
     to put on chains for him, and steady
     I'd still like dances to this day:
     explodes; wine fizzes up... but stay:
     He rings at once, and what a scurry!
     seared as by fire, she stopped. Today
     sequence of dinners stretch away,
     drive there, and with formality
     Amidst the hills, down in that valley,
     darlings, then we'll run away,
     Days when I came to flower serenely
     (in the romantic style, we say,
     dowagers smiled as she went by;
     across green meadows, dilly-dally,
     so a storm-shadow wraps away
     Now she's alarmed; in desperate worry
     How long he'd been here, was her query,
     high time he should be on his way.
     stiffening as the hours go by,
     demanding: when will he reply?
     I've wasted too much life away!
     sickroom attendance night and day
     {107}
     spends light and darkness in the dreary
     devote to whist an evening party,
     So she was called Tatyana. Truly
     he looks, and sees the hour of day --
     do with her when a flat reply
     meanwhile with a dissembler's duty
     ``Last night, what made you fly so early?''
     She's fallen in the snow -- alertly
     he goes ahead and parts the motley
     is represented rather truly,
     invention sparkled, then gave way
           Zhukovsky
     and pâté, Strasbourg's deathless glory,
	--------------Source text--------------
--------
Chapter One


          To live, it hurries, and to feel it hastes.
           Prince Vyazemsky

        I

     ``My uncle -- high ideals inspire him;
     but when past joking he fell sick,
     he really forced one to admire him --
     and never played a shrewder trick.
     Let others learn from his example!
     But God, how deadly dull to sample
     sickroom attendance night and day
     and never stir a foot away!
     And the sly baseness, fit to throttle,
     of entertaining the half-dead:
     one smoothes the pillows down in bed,
     and glumly serves the medicine bottle,
     and sighs, and asks oneself all through:
     "When will the devil come for you?"''
     {35}

        II

     Such were a young rake's meditations --
     by will of Zeus, the high and just,
     the legatee of his relations --
     as horses whirled him through the dust.
     Friends of my Ruslan and Lyudmila,
     without preliminary feeler
     let me acquaint you on the nail
     with this the hero of my tale:
     Onegin, my good friend, was littered
     and bred upon the Neva's brink,
     where you were born as well, I think,
     reader, or where you've shone and glittered!
     There once I too strolled back and forth:
     but I'm allergic to the North...1

        III

     After a fine career, his father
     had only debts on which to live.
     He gave three balls a year, and rather
     promptly had nothing left to give.
     Fate saved Evgeny from perdition:
     at first Madame gave him tuition,
     from her Monsieur took on the child.
     He was sweet-natured, and yet wild.
     Monsieur l'Abbé, the mediocre,
     reluctant to exhaust the boy,
     treated his lessons as a ploy.
     No moralizing from this joker;
     a mild rebuke was his worst mark,
     and then a stroll in Letny Park.
     {36}

        IV

     But when the hour of youthful passion
     struck for Evgeny, with its play
     of hope and gloom, romantic-fashion,
     it was goodbye, Monsieur l'Abbé.
     Eugene was free, and as a dresser
     made London's dandy his professor.
     His hair was fashionably curled,
     and now at last he saw the World.
     In French Onegin had perfected
     proficiency to speak and write,
     in the mazurka he was light,
     his bow was wholly unaffected.
     The World found this enough to treat
     Eugene as clever, and quite sweet.

        V

     We all meandered through our schooling
     haphazard; so, to God be thanks,
     it's easy, without too much fooling,
     to pass for cultured in our ranks.
     Onegin was assessed by many
     (critical judges, strict as any)
     as well-read, though of pedant cast.
     Unforced, as conversation passed,
     he had the talent of saluting
     felicitously every theme,
     of listening like a judge-supreme
     while serious topics were disputing,
     or, with an epigram-surprise,
     of kindling smiles in ladies' eyes.
     {37}

        VI

     Now Latin's gone quite out of favour;
     yet, truthfully and not in chaff,
     Onegin knew enough to savour
     the meaning of an epigraph,
     make Juvenal his text, or better
     add vale when he signed a letter;
     stumblingly call to mind he did
     two verses of the Aeneid.
     He lacked the slightest predilection
     for raking up historic dust
     or stirring annalistic must;
     but groomed an anecdote-collection
     that stretched from Romulus in his prime
     across the years to our own time.

        VII

     He was without that dithyrambic
     frenzy which wrecks our lives for sound,
     and telling trochee from iambic
     was quite beyond his wit, we found.
     He cursed Theocritus and Homer,
     in Adam Smith was his diploma;
     our deep economist had got
     the gift of recognizing what
     a nation's wealth is, what augments it,
     and how a country lives, and why
     it needs no gold if a supply
     of simple product supplements it.
     His father failed to understand
     and took a mortgage on his land.
     {38}

        VIII

     Evgeny's total store of knowledge
     I have no leisure to recall;
     where he was master of his college,
     the art he'd studied best of all,
     his young heyday's supreme employment,
     its work, its torture, its enjoyment,
     what occupied his chafing powers
     throughout the boredom of the hours --
     this was the science of that passion
     which Ovid sang, for which the bard,
     condemned to a lifetime of hard,
     ended his wild career of fashion
     deep in Moldavia the abhorred,
     far, far from Italy, his adored.

        (IX,2) X

     How early he'd learnt to dissemble,
     to hide a hope, to make a show
     of jealousy, to seem to tremble
     or pine, persuade of yes or no,
     and act the humble or imperious,
     the indifferent, or the deadly serious!
     In languid silence, or the flame
     of eloquence, and just the same
     in casual letters of confession --
     one thing inspired his breath, his heart,
     and self-oblivion was his art!
     How soft his glance, or at discretion
     how bold or bashful there, and here
     how brilliant with its instant tear!
     {39}

        XI

     How well he donned new shapes and sizes --
     startling the ingenuous with a jest,
     frightening with all despair's disguises,
     amusing, flattering with the best,
     stalking the momentary weakness,
     with passion and with shrewd obliqueness
     swaying the artless, waiting on
     for unmeant kindness -- how he shone!
     then he'd implore a declaration,
     and listen for the heart's first sound,
     pursue his love -- and at one bound
     secure a secret assignation,
     then afterwards, alone, at ease,
     impart such lessons as you please!

        XII

     How early on he learnt to trouble
     the heart of the professional flirt!
     When out to burst a rival's bubble,
     how well he knew the way to hurt --
     what traps he'd set him, with what malice
     he'd pop the poison in his chalice!
     But you, blest husbands, to the end
     you kept your friendship with our friend:
     the subtle spouse was just as loyal --
     Faublas'3 disciple for an age --
     as was the old suspicious sage,
     and the majestic, antlered royal,
     always contented with his life,
     and with his dinner, and his wife.
     {40}

        (XIII, XIV,) XV

     Some days he's still in bed, and drowses,
     when little notes come on a tray.
     What? Invitations? Yes, three houses
     have each asked him to a soirée:
     a ball here, there a children's party;
     where shall he go, my rogue, my hearty?
     Which one comes first? It's just the same
     to do them all is easy game.
     Meanwhile, attired for morning strolling
     complete with broad-brimmed bolivar,
     Eugene attends the boulevard,
     and there at large he goes patrolling
     until Bréguet's unsleeping chime
     advises him of dinner-time.

        XVI

     He mounts the sledge, with daylight fading:
     ``Make way, make way,'' goes up the shout;
     his collar in its beaver braiding
     glitters with hoar-frost all about.
     He's flown to Talon's,4 calculating
     that there his friend Kavérin's5 waiting;
     he arrives -- the cork goes flying up,
     wine of the Comet6 fills the cup;
     before him roast beef, red and gory,
     and truffles, which have ever been
     youth's choice, the flower of French cuisine:
     and pâté, Strasbourg's deathless glory,
     sits with Limburg's vivacious cheese
     and ananas, the gold of trees.
     {41}

        XVII

     More wine, he calls, to drench the flaming
     fire of the cutlets' scalding fat,
     when Bréguet's chime is heard proclaiming
     the new ballet he should be at.
     He's off -- this ruthless legislator
     for the footlights, this fickle traitor
     to all the most adored actrices,
     this denizen of the coulisses
     that world where every man's a critic
     who'll clap an entrechat, or scoff
     at Cleopatra, hiss her off,
     boo Phaedra out as paralytic,
     encore Moëna,7 -- and rejoice
     to know the audience hears his voice.

        XVIII

     Enchanted land! There like a lampion
     that king of the satiric scene,
     Fonvizin8 sparkled, freedom's champion,
     and the derivative Knyazhnín:8
     there сzerov8 shared the unwilling
     tribute of tears, applause's shrilling,
     with young Semyónova,9 and there
     our friend Katénin8 brought to bear
     once more Corneille's majestic story;
     there caustic Shakhovskóy8 came in
     with comedies of swarm and din;
     there Didelot10 crowned himself with glory:
     there, where the coulisse entrance went,
     that's where my years of youth were spent.
     {42}

        XIX

     My goddesses! Where are you banished?
     lend ears to my lugubrious tone:
     have other maidens, since you vanished,
     taken your place, though not your throne?
     your chorus, is it dead for ever?
     Russia's Terpsichore, shall never
     again I see your soulful flight?
     shall my sad gaze no more alight
     on features known, but to that dreary,
     that alien scene must I now turn
     my disillusioned glass, and yearn,
     bored with hilarity, and weary,
     and yawn in silence at the stage
     as I recall a bygone age?

        XX

     The house is packed out; scintillating,
     the boxes; boiling, pit and stalls;
     the gallery claps -- it's bored with waiting --
     and up the rustling curtain crawls.
     Then with a half-ethereal splendour,
     bound where the magic bow will send her,
     Istómina,11 thronged all around
     by Naiads, one foot on the ground,
     twirls the other slowly as she pleases,
     then suddenly she's off, and there
     she's up and flying through the air
     like fluff before Aeolian breezes;
     she'll spin this way and that, and beat
     against each other swift, small feet.
     {43}

        XXI

     Applause. Onegin enters -- passes
     across the public's toes; he steers
     straight to his stall, then turns his glasses
     on unknown ladies in the tiers;
     he's viewed the boxes without passion,
     he's seen it all; with looks and fashion
     he's dreadfully dissatisfied;
     to gentlemen on every side
     he's bowed politely; his attention
     wanders in a distracted way
     across the stage; he yawns: ``Ballet --
     they all have richly earned a pension;''
     he turns away: ``I've had enough --
     now even Didelot's tedious stuff.''

        XXII

     Still tumbling, devil, snake and Cupid
     on stage are thumping without cease;
     Still in the porch, exhausted-stupid,
     the footmen sleep on the pelisses;
     the audience still is busy stamping,
     still coughing, hissing, clapping, champing;
     still everywhere the lamps are bright;
     outside and in they star the night;
     still shivering in the bitter weather
     the horses fidget worse and worse;
     the coachmen ring the fire, and curse
     their lords, and thwack their palms together;
     but Eugene's out from din and press:
     by now he's driving home to dress.
     {44}

        XXIII

     Shall I depict with expert knowledge
     the cabinet behind the door
     where the prize-boy of fashion's college
     is dressed, undressed, and dressed once more?
     Whatever for caprice of spending
     ingenious London has been sending
     across the Baltic in exchange
     for wood and tallow; all the range
     of useful objects that the curious
     Parisian taste invents for one --
     for friends of languor, or of fun,
     or for the modishly luxurious --
     all this, at eighteen years of age,
     adorned the sanctum of our sage.

        XXIV

     Porcelain and bronzes on the table,
     with amber pipes from Tsaregrad;12
     such crystalled scents as best are able
     to drive the swooning senses mad;
     with combs, and steel utensils serving
     as files, and scissors straight and curving,
     brushes on thirty different scales;
     brushes for teeth, brushes for nails.
     Rousseau (forgive a short distraction)
     could not conceive how solemn Grimm13
     dared clean his nails in front of him,
     the brilliant crackpot: this reaction
     shows freedom's advocate, that strong
     champion of rights, as in the wrong.
     {45}

        XXV

     A man who's active and incisive
     can yet keep nail-care much in mind:
     why fight what's known to be decisive?
     custom is despot of mankind.
     Dressed like -- --,14 duly dreading
     the barbs that envy's always spreading,
     Eugene's a pedant in his dress,
     in fact a thorough fop, no less.
     Three whole hours, at the least accounting,
     he'll spend before the looking-glass,
     then from his cabinet he'll pass
     giddy as Venus when she's mounting
     a masculine disguise to aid
     her progress at the masquerade.

        XXVI

     Your curiosity is burning
     to hear what latest modes require,
     and so, before the world of learning,
     I could describe here his attire;
     and though to do so would be daring,
     it's my profession; he was wearing --
     but pantaloons, waistcoat, and frock,
     these words are not of Russian stock:
     I know (and seek your exculpation)
     that even so my wretched style
     already tends too much to smile
     on words of foreign derivation,
     though years ago I used to look
     at the Academic Diction-book.
     {46}

        XXVII

     That isn't our immediate worry:
     we'd better hasten to the ball,
     where, in a cab, and furious hurry,
     Onegin has outrun us all.
     Along the fronts of darkened houses,
     along the street where slumber drowses,
     twin lamps of serried coupés throw
     a cheerful glimmer on the snow
     and radiate a rainbow: blazing
     with lampions studded all about
     the sumptuous palais shines out;
     shadows that flit behind the glazing
     project in silhouette the tops
     of ladies and of freakish fops.

        XXVIII

     Up to the porch our hero's driven:
     in, past concierge, up marble stair
     flown like an arrow, then he's given
     a deft arrangement to his hair,
     and entered. Ballroom overflowing...
     and band already tired of blowing,
     while a mazurka holds the crowd;
     and everything is cramped and loud;
     spurs of Chevalier Gardes are clinking,
     dear ladies' feet fly past like hail,
     and on their captivating trail
     incendiary looks are slinking,
     while roar of violins contrives
     to drown the hiss of modish wives.
     {47}

        XXIX

     In days of carefree aspirations,
     the ballroom drove me off my head:
     the safest place for declarations,
     and where most surely notes are sped.
     You husbands, deeply I respect you!
     I'm at your service to protect you;
     now pay attention, I beseech,
     and take due warning from my speech.
     You too, mamas, I pray attend it,
     and watch your daughters closer yet,
     yes, focus on them your lorgnette,
     or else... or else, may God forfend it!
     I only write like this, you know,
     since I stopped sinning years ago.

        XXX

     Alas, on pleasure's wild variety
     I've wasted too much life away!
     But, did they not corrupt society,
     I'd still like dances to this day:
     the atmosphere of youth and madness,
     the crush, the glitter and the gladness,
     the ladies' calculated dress;
     I love their feet -- though I confess
     that all of Russia can't contribute
     three pairs of handsome ones -- yet there
     exists for me one special pair!
     one pair! I pay them memory's tribute
     though cold I am and sad; in sleep
     the heartache that they bring lies deep.
     {48}

        XXXI

     Oh, when, and to what desert banished,
     madman, can you forget their print?
     my little feet, where have you vanished,
     what flowers of spring display your dint?
     Nursed in the orient's languid weakness,
     across our snows of northern bleakness
     you left no steps that could be tracked:
     you loved the opulent contact
     of rugs, and carpets' rich refinement.
     Was it for you that I became
     long since unstirred by praise and fame
     and fatherland and grim confinement?
     The happiness of youth is dead,
     just like, on turf, your fleeting tread.

        XXXII

     Diana's breast, the cheeks of Flora,
     all these are charming! but to put
     it frankly, I'm a firm adorer
     of the Terpsichorean foot.
     It fascinates by its assurance
     of recompense beyond endurance,
     and fastens, like a term of art,
     the wilful fancies of the heart.
     My love for it is just as tender,
     under the table's linen shield,
     on springtime grasses of the field,
     in winter, on the cast-iron fender,
     on ballroom's looking-glass parquet
     or on the granite of the bay.
     {49}

        XXXIII

     On the seashore, with storm impending,
     how envious was I of the waves
     each in tumultuous turn descending
     to lie down at her feet like slaves!
     I longed, like every breaker hissing,
     to smother her dear feet with kissing.
     No, never in the hottest fire
     of boiling youth did I desire
     with any torture so exquisite
     to kiss Armida's lips, or seek
     the flaming roses of a cheek,
     or languid bosoms; and no visit
     of raging passion's surge and roll
     ever so roughly rocked my soul!

        XXXIV

     Another page of recollection:
     sometimes, in reverie's sacred land,
     I grasp a stirrup with affection,
     I feel a small foot in my hand;
     fancies once more are hotly bubbling,
     once more that touch is fiercely troubling
     the blood within my withered heart,
     once more the love, once more the smart...
     But, now I've praised the queens of fashion,
     enough of my loquacious lyre:
     they don't deserve what they inspire
     in terms of poetry or passion --
     their looks and language in deceit
     are just as nimble as their feet.
     {50}

        XXXV

     And Eugene? half-awake, half-drowsing,
     from ball to bed behold him come;
     while Petersburg's already rousing,
     untirable, at sound of drum:
     the merchant's up, the cabman's walking
     towards his stall, the pedlar's hawking;
     see with their jugs the milk-girls go
     and crisply crunch the morning snow.
     The city's early sounds awake her;
     shutters are opened and the soft
     blue smoke of chimneys goes aloft,
     and more than once the German baker,
     punctilious in his cotton cap,
     has opened up his serving-trap.

        XXXVI

     Exhausted by the ballroom's clamour,
     converting morning to midnight,
     he sleeps, away from glare and glamour,
     this child of luxury and delight.
     Then, after midday he'll be waking;
     his life till dawn's already making,
     always monotonously gay,
     tomorrow just like yesterday.
     But was it happy, his employment,
     his freedom, in his youth's first flower,
     with brilliant conquests by the shower,
     and every day its own enjoyment?
     Was it to no effect that he,
     at feasts, was strong and fancy-free?
     {51}

        XXXVII

     No, early on his heart was cooling
     and he was bored with social noise;
     no, not for long were belles the ruling
     objective of his thoughts and joys:
     soon, infidelity proved cloying,
     and friends and friendship, soul-destroying;
     not every day could he wash down
     his beefsteak with champagne, or drown
     his Strasbourg pie, or point a moral,
     full of his usual pith and wit,
     with cranium aching fit to split;
     and though he liked a fiery quarrel --
     yet he fell out of love at last
     with sabre's slash, and bullet's blast.

        XXXVIII

     The illness with which he'd been smitten
     should have been analysed when caught,
     something like spleen, that scourge of Britain,
     or Russia's chondria, for short;
     it mastered him in slow gradation;
     thank God, he had no inclination
     to blow his brains out, but in stead
     to life grew colder than the dead.
     So, like Childe Harold, glum, unpleasing,
     he stalked the drawing-rooms, remote
     from Boston's cloth or gossip's quote;
     no glance so sweet, no sigh so teasing,
     no, nothing caused his heart to stir,
     and nothing pierced his senses' blur.
     {52}

        (XXXIX, XL, XLI,) XLII

     Capricious belles of grand Society!
     you were the first ones he forswore;
     for in our time, beyond dubiety,
     the highest circles are a bore.
     It's true, I'll not misrepresent them,
     some ladies preach from Say and Bentham,
     but by and large their talk's a hash
     of the most harmless, hopeless trash.
     And what's more, they're so supercilious,
     so pure, so spotless through and through,
     so pious, and so clever too,
     so circumspect, and so punctilious,
     so virtuous that, no sooner seen,
     at once they give a man the spleen.

        XLIII

     You too, prime beauties in your flower
     who late at night are whirled away
     by drozhkies jaunting at full power
     over the Petersburg pavé --
     he ended even your employment;
     and in retreat from all enjoyment
     locked himself up inside his den
     and with a yawn took up his pen,
     and tried to write, but a hard session
     of work made him feel sick, and still
     no word came flowing from his quill;
     he failed to join that sharp profession
     which I myself won't praise or blame
     since I'm a member of the same.
     {53}

        XLIV

     Idle again by dedication,
     oppressed by emptiness of soul,
     he strove to achieve the appropriation
     of other's thought -- a splendid goal;
     with shelves of books deployed for action,
     he read, and read -- no satisfaction:
     here's boredom, madness or pretence,
     here there's no conscience, here no sense;
     they're all chained up in different fetters,
     the ancients have gone stiff and cold,
     the moderns rage against the old.
     He'd given up girls -- now gave up letters,
     and hid the bookshelf's dusty stack
     in taffeta of mourning black.

        XLV

     Escaped from social rhyme and reason,
     retired, as he, from fashion's stream,
     I was Onegin's friend that season.
     I liked his quality, the dream
     which held him silently subjected,
     his strangeness, wholly unaffected,
     his mind, so cold and so precise.
     The bitterness was mine -- the ice
     was his; we'd both drunk passion's chalice:
     our lives were flat, and what had fired
     both hearts to blaze had now expired;
     there waited for us both the malice
     of blind Fortuna and of men
     in lives that were just dawning then.
     {54}

        XLVI

     He who has lived and thought is certain
     to scorn the men with whom he deals;
     days that are lost behind the curtain,
     ghostlike, must trouble him who feels --
     for him all sham has found rejection,
     he's gnawed by serpent Recollection,
     and by Repentance. All this lends,
     on most occasions between friends,
     a great attraction to conversing.
     At first Onegin's tongue produced
     a haze in me, but I grew used
     to his disputing and his cursing;
     his virulence that made you smile,
     his epigrams topped up with bile.

        XLVII

     How often, when the sky was glowing,
     by Neva, on a summer night,
     and when its waters were not showing,
     in their gay glass, the borrowed light
     of Dian's visage, in our fancies
     recalling earlier time's romances,
     recalling earlier loves, did we,
     now sensitive, and now carefree,
     drink in the midnight benediction,
     the silence when our talk had ceased!
     Like convicts in a dream released
     from gaol to greenwood, by such fiction
     we were swept off, in reverie's haze,
     to the beginning of our days.
     {55}

        XLVIII

     Evgeny stood, with soul regretful,
     and leant upon the granite shelf;
     he stood there, pensive and forgetful,
     just as the Poet15 paints himself.
     Silence was everywhere enthralling;
     just sentries to each other calling,
     and then a drozhky's clopping sound
     from Million Street16 came floating round;
     and then a boat, with oars a-swinging,
     swam on the river's dreaming face,
     and then, with an enchanting grace,
     came distant horns, and gallant singing.
     Yet sweeter far, at such a time,
     the strain of Tasso's octave-rhyme!

        XLIX

     O Adrian waves, my invocation;
     O Brenta, I'll see you in dream;
     hear, once more filled with inspiration,
     the magic voices of your stream,
     sacred to children of Apollo!
     Proud Albion's lyre is what I follow,
     through it they're known to me, and kin.
     Italian nights, when I'll drink in
     your molten gold, your charmed infusion;
     with a Venetian maiden who
     can chatter, and be silent too,
     I'll float in gondola's seclusion;
     from her my lips will learn and mark
     the tongue of love and of Petrarch.
     {56}

        L

     When comes my moment to untether?
     ``it's time!'' and freedom hears my hail.
     I walk the shore,17 I watch the weather,
     I signal to each passing sail.
     Beneath storm's vestment, on the seaway,
     battling along that watery freeway,
     when shall I start on my escape?
     It's time to drop astern the shape
     of the dull shores of my disfavour,
     and there, beneath your noonday sky,
     my Africa,18 where waves break high,
     to mourn for Russia's gloomy savour,
     land where I learned to love and weep,
     land where my heart is buried deep.

        LI

     Eugene would willingly have started
     with me to see an alien strand;
     but soon the ways we trod were parted
     for quite a while by fortune's hand.
     His father died; and (as expected)
     before Onegin there collected
     the usurers' voracious tribe.
     To private tastes we each subscribe:
     Evgeny, hating litigation,
     and satisfied with what he'd got,
     made over to them his whole lot,
     finding in that no deprivation --
     or else, from far off, he could see
     old Uncle's end was soon to be.
     {57}

        LII

     In fact one day a note came flying
     from the agent, with this tale to tell:
     Uncle, in bed, and near to dying,
     wished him to come and say farewell.
     Evgeny read the sad epistle
     and set off prompter than a whistle
     as fast as post-horses could go,
     already yawned before the show,
     exercised, under lucre's banner,
     in sighs and boredom and deceits
     (my tale's beginning here repeats);
     but, when he'd rushed to Uncle's manor,
     a corpse on boards was all he found,
     an offering ready for the ground.

        LIII

     The yard was bursting with dependants;
     there gathered at the coffin-side
     friends, foes, priests, guests, inured attendants
     of every funeral far and wide;
     they buried Uncle, congregated
     to eat and drink, then separated
     with grave goodbyes to the bereaved,
     as if some goal had been achieved.
     Eugene turned countryman. He tasted
     the total ownership of woods,
     mills, lands and waters -- he whose goods
     till then had been dispersed and wasted --
     and glad he was he'd thus arranged
     for his old courses to be changed.
     {58}

        LIV

     It all seemed new -- for two days only --
     the coolness of the sombre glade,
     the expanse of fields, so wide, so lonely,
     the murmur where the streamlet played...
     the third day, wood and hill and grazing
     gripped him no more; soon they were raising
     an urge to sleep; soon, clear as clear,
     he saw that, as in cities, here
     boredom has just as sure an entry,
     although there are no streets, no cards,
     no mansions, no ballrooms, no bards.
     Yes, spleen was waiting like a sentry,
     and dutifully shared his life
     just like a shadow, or a wife.

        LV

     No, I was born for peace abounding
     and country stillness: there the lyre
     has voices that are more resounding,
     poetic dreams, a brighter fire.
     To harmless idleness devoted,
     on waves of far niente floated,
     I roam by the secluded lake.
     And every morning I awake
     to freedom, softness and enjoyment:
     sleep much, read little, and put down
     the thought of volatile renown.
     Was it not in such sweet employment
     such shadowy and leisured ways,
     that once I spent my happiest days?
     {59}

        LVI

     O flowers, and love, and rustic leisure,
     o fields -- to you I'm vowed at heart.
     I regularly take much pleasure
     in showing how to tell apart
     myself and Eugene, lest a reader
     of mocking turn, or else a breeder
     of calculated slander should,
     spying my features, as he could,
     put back the libel on the table
     that, like proud Byron, I can draw
     self-portraits only -- furthermore
     the charge that poets are unable
     to sing of others must imply
     the poet's only theme is ``I.''

        LVII

     Poets, I'll say in this connection,
     adore the love that comes in dream.
     In time past, objects of affection
     peopled my sleep, and to their theme
     my soul in secret gave survival;
     then from the Muse there came revival:
     my carefree song would thus reveal
     the mountain maiden,19 my ideal,
     and captive girls, by Salgir20 lying.
     And now, my friends, I hear from you
     a frequent question: ``tell me who
     inspires your lute to sounds of sighing?
     To whom do you, from all the train
     of jealous girls, devote its strain?
     {60}

        LVIII

     ``Whose glance, provoking inspiration,
     rewards the music of your mind
     with fond caress? whose adoration
     is in your poetry enshrined?''
     No one's, I swear by God! in sadness
     I suffered once from all the madness
     of love's anxiety. Blessed is he
     who can combine it with the free
     fever of rhyme: thereby he's doubled
     poetry's sacred frenzy, made
     a stride on Petrarch's path, allayed
     the pangs with which his heart was troubled,
     and, with it, forced renown to come --
     but I, in love, was dull and dumb.

        LIX

     Love passed, the Muse appeared, the weather
     of mind got clarity new-found;
     now free, I once more weave together
     emotion, thought, and magic sound;
     I write, my heart has ceased its pining,
     my thoughtless pen has stopped designing,
     beside unfinished lines, a suite
     of ladies' heads, and ladies' feet;
     dead ash sets no more sparks a-flying;
     I'm grieving still, but no more tears,
     and soon, oh soon the storm's arrears
     will in my soul be hushed and dying.
     That's when I'll sit down to compose
     an ode in twenty-five cantos.
     {61}

        LX

     I've drawn a plan and a projection,
     the hero's name's decided too.
     Meanwhile my novel's opening section
     is finished, and I've looked it through
     meticulously; in my fiction
     there's far too much of contradiction,
     but I refuse to chop or change.
     The censor's tribute, I'll arrange:
     I'll feed the journalists for dinner
     fruits of my labour and my ink...
     So now be off to Neva's brink,
     you newborn work, and like a winner
     earn for me the rewards of fame --
     misunderstanding, noise, and blame!
     {62}

        Notes to Chapter One

     1 ``Written in Bessarabia.'' Pushkin's note.
     2 Stanzas IX, XIII, XIV, XXXIX, XL and XLI were omitted by Pushkin.
     3 Hero of Louvet's novel about betrayed husbands.
     4 ``Well-known restaurateur.'' Pushkin's note.
     5 Hussar and friend of Pushkin.
     6 Vintage 1811, the year of the Comet.
     7 Heroine of Ozerov's tragedy Fingal.
     8 Playwrights of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
     9 Actress in tragedy.
     10 Dancer and choreographer.
     11 Ballerina, once courted by Pushkin.
     12 Constantinople.
     13 French encyclopedist.
     14 Pushkin leaves blank the name of Onegin's model dandy.
     15 A mocking  reference to Mikhail  Muraviev's poem ``To the Goddess of
the Neva.''
     16  Millyonaya, a street  parallel to the Neva, and one block away from
it.
     17 ``Written at Odessa.'' Pushkin's note.
     18 ``The  author, on  his mother's  side,  is of  African  descent...''
Pushkin's note.
     19 Refers  to the  Circassian girl  in  Pushkin's  poem  The  Caucasian
Prisoner.
     20 River  in  the  Crimea.  The  reference  is to  the  harem  girls in
Pushkin's poem The Fountain of Bakhchisarai.

--------
Chapter Two


          O rus!
           Horace
          O Russia!

        I

     The place where Eugene loathed his leisure
     was an enchanting country nook:
     there any friend of harmless pleasure
     would bless the form his fortune took.
     The manor house, in deep seclusion,
     screened by a hill from storm's intrusion,
     looked on a river: far away
     before it was the golden play
     of light that flowering fields reflected:
     villages flickered far and near,
     and cattle roamed the plain, and here
     a park, enormous and neglected,
     spread out its shadow all around --
     the pensive Dryads' hiding-ground.
     {63}

        II

     The château was of a construction
     befitting such a noble pile:
     it stood, defiant of destruction
     in sensible old-fashioned style.
     High ceilings everywhere abounded;
     in the saloon, brocade-surrounded,
     ancestral1 portraits met the view
     and stoves with tiles of various hue.
     All this has now gone out of fashion,
     I don't know why, but for my friend
     interior décor in the end
     excited not a hint of passion:
     a modish taste, a dowdy touch --
     both set him yawning just as much.

        III

     The rustic sage, in that apartment,
     forty years long would criticise
     his housekeeper and her department
     look through the pane, and squash the flies.
     Oak-floored, and simple as a stable:
     two cupboards, one divan, a table,
     no trace of ink, no spots, no stains.
     And of the cupboards, one contains
     a book of household calculations,
     the other, jugs of applejack,
     fruit liqueurs and an Almanack
     for 1808: his obligations
     had left the squire no time to look
     at any other sort of book.
     {64}

        IV

     Alone amid all his possessions,
     to pass the time was Eugene's theme:
     it led him, in these early sessions,
     to institute a new regime.
     A thinker in a desert mission,
     he changed the corvée of tradition
     into a small quit-rent -- and got
     his serfs rejoicing at their lot.
     But, in a fearful huff, his thrifty
     neighbour was sure, from this would flow
     consequences of hideous woe;
     another's grin was sly and shifty,
     but all concurred that, truth to speak,
     he was a menace, and a freak.

        V

     At first they called; but on perceiving
     invariably, as time went on,
     that from the backdoor he'd be leaving
     on a fast stallion from the Don,
     once on the highway he'd detected
     the noise their rustic wheels projected --
     they took offence at this, and broke
     relations off, and never spoke.
     ``The man's a boor; his brain is missing,
     he's a freemason too; for him,
     red wine in tumblers to the brim --
     but ladies' hands are not for kissing;
     it's yes or no, but never sir.''
     The vote was passed without demur.
     {65}

        VI

     Meanwhile another new landowner
     came driving to his country seat,
     and, in the district, this persona
     drew scrutiny no less complete --
     Vladimir Lensky, whose creator
     was Göttingen, his alma mater,
     good-looking, in the flower of age,
     a poet, and a Kantian sage.
     He'd brought back all the fruits of learning
     from German realms of mist and steam,
     freedom's enthusiastic dream,
     a spirit strange, a spirit burning,
     an eloquence of fevered strength,
     and raven curls of shoulder-length.

        VII

     He was too young to have been blighted
     by the cold world's corrupt finesse;
     his soul still blossomed out, and lighted
     at a friend's word, a girl's caress.
     In heart's affairs, a sweet beginner,
     he fed on hope's deceptive dinner;
     the world's éclat, its thunder-roll,
     still captivated his young soul.
     He sweetened up with fancy's icing
     the uncertainties within his heart;
     for him, the objective on life's chart
     was still mysterious and enticing --
     something to rack his brains about,
     suspecting wonders would come out.
     {66}

        VIII

     He was convinced, a kindred creature
     would be allied to him by fate;
     that, meanwhile, pinched and glum of feature,
     from day to day she could but wait;
     and he believed his friends were ready
     to put on chains for him, and steady
     their hand to grapple slander's cup,
     in his defence, and smash it up;
     < that there existed, for the indulgence
     of human friendship, holy men,
     immortals picked by fate for when,
     with irresistible refulgence,
     their breed would (some years after this)
     shine out and bring the world to bliss. >2

        IX

     Compassion, yes, and indignation,
     honest devotion to the good,
     bitter-sweet glory's inspiration,
     already stirred him as they should.
     He roamed the world, his lyre behind him;
     Schiller and Goethe had refined him,
     and theirs was the poetic flame
     that fired his soul, to burn the same;
     the Muses' lofty arts and fashions,
     fortunate one, he'd not disgrace;
     but in his songs kept pride of place
     for the sublime, and for the passions
     of virgin fancy, and again
     the charm of what was grave and plain.
     {67}

        X

     He sang of love, to love subjected,
     his song was limpid in its tune
     as infant sleep, or the unaffected
     thoughts of a girl, or as the moon
     through heaven's expanse serenely flying,
     that queen of secrets and of sighing.
     He sang of grief and parting-time,
     of something vague, some misty clime;
     roses romantically blowing;
     of many distant lands he sang
     where in the heart of silence rang
     his sobs, where his live tears were flowing;
     he sang of lifetime's yellowed page --
     when not quite eighteen years of age.

        XI

     But in that desert his attainments
     only to Eugene showed their worth;
     Lensky disliked the entertainments
     of neighbouring owners of the earth --
     he fled from their resounding chatter!
     Their talk, so sound on every matter,
     on liquor, and on hay brought in,
     on kennels, and on kith and kin,
     it had no sparkle of sensation,
     it lacked, of course, poetic heart,
     sharpness of wit, and social art,
     and logic; yet the conversation
     upon the side of the distaff --
     that was less clever still by half.
     {68}

        XII

     Vladimir, wealthy and good-looking,
     was asked around as quite a catch --
     such is the usual country cooking;
     and all the neighbours planned a match
     between their girls and this half-Russian.
     As soon as he appears, discussion
     touches obliquely, but with speed,
     on the dull life that bachelors lead;
     and then it's tea that comes to mention,
     and Dunya works the samovar;
     and soon they bring her... a guitar
     and whisper ``Dunya, pay attention!''
     then, help me God, she caterwauls:
     ``Come to me in my golden halls.''

        XIII

     Lensky of course was quite untainted
     by any itch for marriage ties;
     instead the chance to get acquainted
     with Eugene proved a tempting prize.
     So, verse and prose, they came together.
     No ice and flame, no stormy weather
     and granite, were so far apart.
     At first, disparity of heart
     rendered them tedious to each other;
     then liking grew, then every day
     they met on horseback; quickly they
     became like brother knit to brother.
     Friendship, as I must own to you,
     blooms when there's nothing else to do.
     {69}

        XIV

     But friendship, as between our heroes,
     can't really be: for we've outgrown
     old prejudice; all men are zeros,
     the units are ourselves alone.
     Napoleon's our sole inspiration;
     the millions of two-legged creation
     for us are instruments and tools;
     feeling is quaint, and fit for fools.
     More tolerant in his conception
     than most. Evgeny, though he knew
     and scorned his fellows through and through,
     yet, as each rule has its exception,
     people there were he glorified,
     feelings he valued -- from outside.

        XV

     He smiled as Lensky talked: the heady
     perfervid language of the bard,
     his mind, in judgement still unsteady,
     and always the inspired regard --
     to Eugene all was new and thrilling;
     he struggled to bite back the chilling
     word on his lips, and thought: it's sheer
     folly for me to interfere
     with such a blissful, brief infection --
     even without me it will sink;
     but meanwhile let him live, and think
     the universe is all perfection;
     youth is a fever; we must spare
     its natural right to rave and flare.
     {70}

        XVI

     Between them, every topic started
     reflection or provoked dispute:
     treaties of nations long departed,
     and good and ill, and learning's fruit,
     the prejudices of the ages,
     the secrets of the grave, the pages
     of fate, and life, each in its turn
     became their scrutiny's concern.
     In the white heat of some dissension
     the abstracted poet would bring forth
     fragments of poems from the North,
     which, listening with some condescension,
     the tolerant Evgeny heard --
     but scarcely understood a word.

        XVII

     But it was passion that preempted
     the thoughts of my two anchorites.
     From that rough spell at last exempted,
     Onegin spoke about its flights
     with sighs unconsciously regretful.
     Happy is he who's known its fretful
     empire, and fled it; happier still
     is he who's never felt its will,
     he who has cooled down love with parting,
     and hate with malice; he whose life
     is yawned away with friends and wife
     untouched by envy's bitter smarting,
     who on a deuce, that famous cheat,
     has never staked his family seat.
     {71}

        XVIII

     When we've retreated to the banner
     of calm and reason, when the flame
     of passion's out, and its whole manner
     become a joke to us, its game,
     its wayward tricks, its violent surging,
     its echoes, its belated urging,
     reduced to sense, not without pain --
     we sometimes like to hear again
     passion's rough language talked by others,
     and feel once more emotion's ban.
     So a disabled soldier-man,
     retired, forgotten by his brothers,
     in his small shack, will listen well
     to tales that young moustachios tell.

        XIX

     But it's the talent for concealing
     that ardent youth entirely lacks;
     hate, love, joy, sorrow -- every feeling,
     it blabs, and spills them in its tracks.
     As, lovingly, in his confession,
     the poet's heart found full expression,
     Eugene, with solemn face, paid heed,
     and felt himself love's invalide.
     Lensky ingenuously related
     his conscience's record, and so
     Onegin swiftly came to know
     his tale of youthful love, narrated
     with deep emotion through and through,
     to us, though, not exactly new.
     {72}

        XX

     Ah, he had loved a love that never
     is known today; only a soul
     that raves with poetry can ever
     be doomed to feel it: there's one goal
     perpetually, one goal for dreaming,
     one customary object gleaming,
     one customary grief each hour!
     not separation's chilling power,
     no years of absence past returning,
     no beauties of a foreign clime,
     no noise of gaiety, no time
     devoted to the Muse, or learning,
     nothing could alter or could tire
     this soul that glowed with virgin fire.

        XXI

     Since earliest boyhood he had doted
     on Olga; from heart's ache still spared,
     with tenderness he'd watched and noted
     her girlhood games; in them he'd shared,
     by deep and shady woods protected;
     the crown of marriage was projected
     for them by fathers who, as friends
     and neighbours, followed the same ends.
     Away inside that unassuming
     homestead, before her parents' gaze,
     she blossomed in the graceful ways
     of innocence: a lily blooming
     in deepest grasses, quite alone,
     to bee and butterfly unknown.
     {73}

        XXII

     And our young poet -- Olga fired him
     in his first dream of passion's fruit,
     and thoughts of her were what inspired him
     to the first meanings of his flute.
     Farewell the games of golden childhood!
     he fell in love with darkest wildwood,
     solitude, stillness and the night,
     the stars, the moon -- celestial light
     to which so oft we've dedicated
     those walks amid the gloom and calm
     of evening, and those tears, the balm
     of secret pain... but it's now rated
     by judgement of the modern camp
     almost as good as a dim lamp.

        XXIII

     Full of obedience and demureness,
     as gay as morning and as clear,
     poetic in her simple pureness,
     sweet as a lover's kiss, and dear,
     in Olga everything expresses --
     the skyblue eyes, the flaxen tresses,
     smile, voice and movements, little waist --
     take any novel, clearly traced
     you're sure to find her portrait in it:
     a portrait with a charming touch;
     once I too liked it very much;
     but now it bores me every minute.
     Reader, the elder sister now
     must be my theme, if you'll allow.
     {74}

        XXIV

     Tatyana3 was her name... I own it,
     self-willed it may be just the same;
     but it's the first time you'll have known it,
     a novel graced with such a name.
     What of it? it's euphonious, pleasant,
     and yet inseparably present,
     I know it, in the thoughts of all
     are old times, and the servants' hall.
     We must confess that taste deserts us
     even in our names (and how much worse
     when we begin to talk of verse);
     culture, so far from healing, hurts us;
     what it's transported to our shore
     is mincing manners -- nothing more.

        XXV

     So she was called Tatyana. Truly
     she lacked her sister's beauty, lacked
     the rosy bloom that glowed so newly
     to catch the eye and to attract.
     Shy as a savage, silent, tearful,
     wild as a forest deer, and fearful,
     Tatyana had a changeling look
     in her own home. She never took
     to kissing or caressing father
     or mother; and in all the play
     of children, though as young as they,
     she never joined, or skipped, but rather
     in silence all day she'd remain
     ensconced beside the window-pane.
     {75}

        XXVI

     Reflection was her friend and pleasure
     right from the cradle of her days;
     it touched with reverie her leisure,
     adorning all its country ways.
     Her tender touch had never fingered
     the needle, never had she lingered
     to liven with a silk atour
     the linen stretched on the tambour.
     Sign of the urge for domination:
     in play with her obedient doll
     the child prepares for protocol --
     that corps of social legislation --
     and to it, with a grave import,
     repeats what her mama has taught.

        XXVII

     Tatyana had no dolls to dandle,
     not even in her earliest age;
     she'd never tell them news or scandal
     or novelties from fashion's page.
     Tatyana never knew the attraction
     of childish pranks: a chilled reaction
     to horror-stories told at night
     in winter was her heart's delight.
     Whenever nyanya had collected
     for Olga, on the spreading lawn,
     her little friends, Tatyana'd yawn,
     she'd never join the game selected,
     for she was bored by laughs and noise
     and by the sound of silly joys.
     {76}

        XXVIII

     She loved the balcony, the session
     of waiting for the dawn to blush,
     when, in pale sky, the stars' procession
     fades from the view, and in the hush
     earth's rim grows light, and a forewarning
     whisper of breeze announces morning,
     and slowly day begins to climb.
     In winter, when for longer time
     the shades of night within their keeping
     hold half the world still unreleased,
     and when, by misty moon, the east
     is softly, indolently sleeping,
     wakened at the same hour of night
     Tatyana'd rise by candlelight.

        XXIX

     From early on she loved romances,
     they were her only food... and so
     she fell in love with all the fancies
     of Richardson and of Rousseau.
     Her father, kindly, well-regarded,
     but in an earlier age retarded,
     could see no harm in books; himself
     he never took one from the shelf,
     thought them a pointless peccadillo;
     and cared not what his daughter kept
     by way of secret tome that slept
     until the dawn beneath her pillow.
     His wife, just like Tatyana, had
     on Richardson gone raving mad.
     {77}

        XXX

     And not because she'd read him, either,
     and not because she'd once preferred
     Lovelace, or Grandison, or neither;
     but in the old days she had heard
     about them -- nineteen to the dozen --
     so often from her Moscow cousin
     Princess Alina. She was still
     engaged then -- but against her will;
     loved someone else, not her intended,
     someone towards whose heart and mind
     her feelings were far more inclined --
     this Grandison of hers was splendid,
     a fop, a punter on the cards,
     and junior Ensign in the Guards.

        XXXI

     She was like him and always sported
     the latest fashions of the town;
     but, without asking, they transported
     her to the altar and the crown.
     The better to dispel her sorrow
     her clever husband on the morrow
     took her to his estate, where she,
     at first, with God knows whom to see,
     in tears and violent tossing vented
     her grief, and nearly ran away.
     Then, plunged in the housekeeper's day,
     she grew accustomed, and contented.
     In stead of happiness, say I,
     custom's bestowed us from on high.
     {78}

        XXXII

     For it was custom that consoled her
     in grief that nothing else could mend;
     soon a great truth came to enfold her
     and give her comfort to the end:
     she found, in labours and in leisure,
     the secret of her husband's measure,
     and ruled him like an autocrat --
     so all went smoothly after that.
     Mushrooms in brine, for winter eating,
     fieldwork directed from the path,
     accounts, shaved forelocks,4 Sunday bath;
     meantime she'd give the maids a beating
     if her cross mood was at its worst --
     but never asked her husband first.

        XXXIII

     No, soon she changed her old demeanour:
     girls' albums, signed in blood for choice;
     Praskovya re-baptized ``Polina'';
     conversing in a singsong voice;
     lacing her stays up very tightly;
     pronouncing through her nose politely
     the Russian N, like N in French;
     soon all that went without a wrench:
     album and stays, Princess Alina,
     sentiment, notebook, verses, all
     she quite forgot -- began to call
     ``Akulka'' the onetime Selina,
     and introduced, for the last lap,
     a quilted chamber-robe and cap.
     {79}

        XXXIV

     Her loving spouse with approbation
     left her to follow her own line,
     trusted her without hesitation,
     and wore his dressing-gown to dine.
     His life went sailing in calm weather;
     sometimes the evening brought together
     neighbours and friends in kindly group,
     a plain, unceremonious troop,
     for grumbling, gossiping and swearing
     and for a chuckle or a smile.
     The evening passes, and meanwhile
     here's tea that Olga's been preparing;
     after that, supper's served, and so
     bed-time, and time for guests to go.

        XXXV

     Throughout their life, so calm, so peaceful,
     sweet old tradition was preserved:
     for them, in Butterweek5 the greaseful,
     Russian pancakes were always served;
     < ...
     ... >2
     they needed kvas like air; at table
     their guests, for all they ate and drank,
     were served in order of their rank.
     {80}

        XXXVI

     And so they lived, two ageing mortals,
     till he at last was summoned down
     into the tomb's wide open portals,
     and once again received a crown.
     Just before dinner, from his labours
     he rested -- wept for by his neighbours,
     his children and his faithful wife,
     far more than most who leave this life.
     He was a good and simple barin;6
     above the dust of his remains
     the funeral monument explains:
     ``A humble sinner, Dimitry Larin,
     beneath the stone reposes here,
     servant of God, and Brigadier.''

        XXXVII

     Lensky, restored to his manorial
     penates, came to cast an eye
     over his neighbour's plain memorial,
     and offer to that ash a sigh;
     sadly he mourned for the departed.
     ``Poor Yorick,'' said he, broken-hearted:
     ``he dandled me as a small boy.
     How many times I made a toy
     of his Ochákov7 decoration!
     He destined Olga's hand for me,
     kept asking: "shall I live to see"...''
     so, full of heart-felt tribulation,
     Lensky composed in autograph
     a madrigal for epitaph.
     {81}

        XXXVIII

     There too, he honoured, hotly weeping,
     his parents' patriarchal dust
     with lines to mark where they were sleeping...
     Alas! the generations must,
     as fate's mysterious purpose burrows,
     reap a brief harvest on their furrows;
     they rise and ripen and fall dead:
     others will follow where they tread...
     and thus our race, so fluctuating,
     grows, surges, boils, for lack of room
     presses its forebears to the tomb.
     We too shall find our hour is waiting;
     it will be our descendants who
     out of this world will crowd us too.

        XXXIX

     So glut yourselves until you're sated
     on this unstable life, my friends!
     its nullity I've always hated,
     I know too surely how it ends.
     I'm blind to every apparition;
     and yet a distant admonition
     of hope sometimes disturbs my heart;
     it would be painful to depart
     and leave no faint footprint of glory...
     I never lived or wrote for praise;
     yet how I wish that I might raise
     to high renown my doleful story,
     that there be just one voice which came,
     like a true friend, to speak my name.
     {82}

        XL

     And someone's heart will feel a quiver,
     for maybe fortune will have saved
     from drowning's death in Lethe river
     the strophe over which I slaved;
     perhaps -- for flattering hope will linger --
     some future dunce will point a finger
     at my famed portrait and will say:
     he was a poet in his day.
     I thank him without reservation,
     the peaceful Muses' devotee,
     whose memory will preserve for me
     the fleeting works of my creation,
     whose kindly hand will ruffle down
     the laurel in the old man's crown!
     {83}

        Notes to Chapter Two

     1 Pushkin first wrote ``imperial portraits''; but this he later altered
``for reasons of censorship'' because, as Nabokov explains, ``tsars were not
to be mentioned in so offhand a way''.
     2 Lines discarded by Pushkin.
     3  ``Sweet-sounding Greek names like  Agathon... etc., are only current
in Russia among the common people.'' Pushkin's note.
     4 Serfs chosen as recruits for the army had their forelock cut off.
     5 The week before Lent.
     6 Gentleman, squire.
     7 Fortress captured from the Turks in 1788.

--------
Chapter Three


          Elle était fille, elle était amoureuse.
           Malfilâtre

     ``You're off? why, there's a poet for you!''
     ``Goodbye, Onegin, time I went.''
     ``Well, I won't hold you up or bore you;
     but where are all your evenings spent?''
     ``At the Larins'!'' ``But how mysterious.
     For goodness' sake, you can't be serious
     killing each evening off like that?''
     ``You're wrong.'' ``But what I wonder at
     is this -- one sees from here the party:
     in first place -- listen, am I right? --
     a simple Russian family night:
     the guests are feasted, good and hearty,
     on jam, and speeches in regard
     to rains, and flax, and the stockyard.''
     {84}

        II

     ``I don't see what's so bad about it.''
     ``Boredom, that's what so bad, my friend.''
     ``Your modish world, I'll do without it;
     give me the homely hearth, and lend...''
     ``You pile one eclogue on another!
     for God's sake, that will do. But, brother,
     you're really going? Well, I'm sad.
     Now, Lensky, would it be so bad
     for me to glimpse this Phyllis ever
     with whom your thoughts are so obsessed --
     pen, tears, and rhymes, and all the rest?
     Present me, please.'' ``You're joking.'' ``Never.''
     ``Gladly.'' ``So when?'' ``Why not tonight?
     They will receive us with delight.''

        III

     ``Let's go.'' The friends, all haste and vigour,
     drive there, and with formality
     are treated to the fullest rigour
     of old-lime hospitality.
     The protocol is all one wishes:
     the jams appear in little dishes;
     on a small table's oilcloth sheen
     the jug of bilberry wine is seen.1
     {85}

        IV

     And home was now their destination;
     as by the shortest way they flew,
     this was our heroes' conversation
     secretly overheard by you.
     ``You yawn, Onegin?'' ``As I'm used to.''
     ``This time I think you've been reduced to
     new depths of boredom.'' ``No, the same.
     The fields are dark, since evening came.
     Drive on, Andryushka! quicker, quicker!
     the country's pretty stupid here!
     oh, à propos: Larin's a dear
     simple old lady; but the liquor --
     I'm much afraid that bilberry wine
     won't benefit these guts of mine.''

        V

     ``But tell me, which one was Tatyana?''
     ``She was the one who looked as still
     and melancholy as Svetlana,2
     and sat down by the window-sill.''
     ``The one you love's the younger daughter?''
     ``Why not?'' ``I'd choose the other quarter
     if I, like you, had been a bard.
     Olga's no life in her regard:
     the roundest face that you've set eyes on,
     a pretty girl exactly like
     any Madonna by Van Dyck:
     a dumb moon, on a dumb horizon.''
     Lensky had a curt word to say
     and then sat silent all the way.
     {86}

        VI

     Meanwhile the news of Eugene coming
     to the Larins' had caused a spout
     of gossip, and set comment humming
     among the neighbours round about.
     Conjecture found unending matter:
     there was a general furtive chatter,
     and jokes and spiteful gossip ran
     claiming Tatyana'd found her man;
     and some were even testifying
     the marriage plans were all exact
     but held up by the simple fact
     that modish rings were still a-buying.
     Of Lensky's fate they said no more --
     they'd settled that some years before.

        VII

     Tatyana listened with vexation
     to all this tattle, yet at heart
     in indescribable elation,
     despite herself, rehearsed the part:
     the thought sank in, and penetrated:
     she fell in love -- the hour was fated...
     so fires of spring will bring to birth
     a seedling fallen in the earth.
     Her feelings in their weary session
     had long been wasting and enslaved
     by pain and languishment; she craved
     the fateful diet; by depression
     her heart had long been overrun:
     her soul was waiting... for someone.
     {87}

        VIII

     Tatyana now need wait no longer.
     Her eyes were opened, and she said
     ``this is the one!'' Ah, ever stronger,
     in sultry sleep, in lonely bed,
     all day, all night, his presence fills her,
     by magic everything instils her
     with thoughts of him in ceaseless round.
     She hates a friendly voice's sound,
     or servants waiting on her pleasure.
     Sunk in dejection, she won't hear
     the talk of guests when they appear;
     she calls down curses on their leisure,
     and, when one's least prepared for it
     their tendency to call, and sit.

        IX

     Now, she devours, with what attention,
     delicious novels, laps them up;
     and all their ravishing invention
     with sheer enchantment fills her cup!
     These figures from the world of seeming,
     embodied by the power of dreaming,
     the lover of Julie Wolmar,3
     and Malek Adel,4 de Linar,5
     and Werther, martyred and doom-laden,
     and Grandison beyond compare,
     who sets me snoring then and there --
     all for our tender dreamy maiden
     are coloured in a single tone,
     all blend into Eugene alone.
     {88}

        X

     Seeing herself as a creation --
     Clarissa, Julie, or Delphine6 --
     by writers of her admiration,
     Tatyana, lonely heroine,
     roamed the still forest like a ranger,
     sought in her book, that text of danger
     and found her dreams, her secret fire,
     the full fruit of her heart's desire;
     she sighed, and in a trance coopted
     another's joy, another's breast,
     whispered by heart a note addressed
     to the hero that she'd adopted.
     But ours, whatever he might be,
     ours was no Grandison -- not he.

        XI

     Lending his tone a grave inflection,
     the ardent author of the past
     showed one a pattern of perfection
     in which his hero's mould was cast.
     He gave this figure -- loved with passion,
     wronged always in disgraceful fashion --
     a soul of sympathy and grace,
     and brains, and an attractive face.
     Always our fervid hero tended
     pure passion's flame, and in a trice
     would launch into self-sacrifice;
     always before the volume ended
     due punishment was handed down
     to vice, while virtue got its crown.
     {89}

        XII

     Today a mental fog enwraps us,
     each moral puts us in a doze,
     even in novels, vice entraps us,
     yes, even there its triumph grows.
     Now that the British Muse is able
     to wreck a maiden's sleep with fable,
     the idol that she'll most admire
     is either the distrait Vampire,
     Melmoth,7 whose roaming never ceases,
     Sbogar,8 mysterious through and through,
     the Corsair, or the Wandering Jew.
     Lord Byron, with his shrewd caprices,
     dressed up a desperate egoism
     to look like sad romanticism.

        XIII

     In this, dear reader, if you know it,
     show me the sense. Divine decree
     may wind up my career as poet;
     perhaps, though Phoebus warns, I'll see
     installed in me a different devil,
     and sink to prose's humble level:
     a novel on the established line
     may then amuse my glad decline.
     No secret crimes, and no perditions,
     shall make my story grim as hell;
     no, quite naively I'll retell
     a Russian family's old traditions;
     love's melting dreams shall fill my rhyme,
     and manners of an earlier time.
     {90}

        XIV

     I'll catalogue each simple saying
     in father's or old uncle's book,
     and tell of children's plighted playing
     by ancient limes, or by a brook;
     and after jealousy's grim weather
     I'll part them, bring them back together;
     I'll make them spar another round,
     then to the altar, to be crowned.
     I'll conjure up that swooning fashion
     of ardent speech, that aching flow
     of language which, so long ago,
     facing a belle I loved with passion,
     my tongue kept drawing from the heart --
     but now I've rather lost the art.

        XV

     Tatyana dear, with you I'm weeping:
     for you have, at this early date,
     into a modish tyrant's keeping
     resigned disposal of your fate.
     Dear Tanya, you're condemned to perish;
     but first, the dreams that hope can cherish
     evoke for you a sombre bliss;
     you learn life's sweetness, and with this
     you drink the magic draught of yearning,
     that poison brew; and in your mind
     reverie hounds you, and you find
     shelter for trysts at every turning;
     in front of you, on every hand,
     you see your fated tempter stand.
     {91}

        XVI

     Tatyana, hunted by love's anguish,
     has made the park her brooding-place,
     suddenly lowering eyes that languish,
     too faint to stir a further pace:
     her bosom heaves, her cheeks are staring
     scarlet with passion's instant flaring,
     upon her lips the breathing dies,
     noise in her ears, glare in her eyes...
     then night comes on; the moon's patrolling
     far-distant heaven's vaulted room;
     a nightingale, in forest gloom,
     sets a sonorous cadence rolling --
     Tatyana, sleepless in the dark,
     makes to her nurse low-voiced remark:

        XVII

     ``I can't sleep, nyanya: it's so stifling!
     open the window, sit down near.''
     ``Why, Tanya, what...?'' ``All's dull and trifling.
     The olden days, I want to hear...''
     ``What of them, Tanya? I was able,
     years back, to call up many a fable;
     I kept in mind an ancient store
     of tales of girls, and ghosts, and lore:
     but now my brain is darkened, Tanya:
     now I've forgotten all I knew.
     A sorry state of things, it's true!
     My mind is fuddled.'' ``Tell me, nyanya,
     your early life, unlock your tongue:
     were you in love when you were young?''
     {92}

        XVIII

     ``What nonsense, Tanya! in those other
     ages we'd never heard of love:
     why, at the thought, my husband's mother
     had chased me to the world above.''
     ``How did you come to marry, nyanya?''
     ``I reckon, by God's will. My Vanya
     was younger still, but at that stage
     I was just thirteen years of age.
     Two weeks the matchmaker was plying
     to see my kin, and in the end
     my father blessed me. So I'd spend
     my hours in fear and bitter crying.
     Then, crying, they untwined my plait,
     and sang me to the altar-mat.

        XIX

     ``So to strange kinsfolk I was taken...
     but you're not paying any heed.''
     ``Oh nurse, I'm sad, I'm sad, I'm shaken,
     I'm sick, my dear, I'm sick indeed.
     I'm near to sobbing, near to weeping!...''
     ``You're ill, God have you in his keeping,
     the Lord have mercy on us all!
     whatever you may need, just call...
     I'll sprinkle you with holy water,
     you're all in fever... heavens above.''
     ``Nurse, I'm not ill; I... I'm in love.''
     ``The Lord God be with you, my daughter!''
     and, hands a-tremble, Nyanya prayed
     and put a cross-sign on the maid.
     {93}

        XX

     ``I am in love,'' Tatyana's wailing
     whisper repeated to the crone.
     ``My dearest heart, you're sick and ailing.''
     ``I am in love; leave me alone.''
     And all the while the moon was shining
     and with its feeble glow outlining
     the girl's pale charms, her loosened hair,
     her drops of tears, and seated there,
     in quilted coat, where rays were gleaming
     on a small bench by Tanya's bed,
     the grey-haired nurse with kerchiefed head;
     and everything around was dreaming,
     in the deep stillness of the night,
     bathed in the moon's inspiring light.

        XXI

     Tatyana watched the moon, and floated
     through distant regions of the heart...
     A thought was born, and quickly noted...
     ``Go, nurse, and leave me here apart.
     Give me a pen and give me paper,
     bring up a table, and a taper;
     good night; I swear I'll lie down soon.''
     She was alone, lit by the moon.
     Elbow on table, spirit seething,
     still filled with Eugene, Tanya wrote,
     and in her unconsidered note
     all a pure maiden's love was breathing.
     She folds the page, lays down the plume.,
     Tatyana! it's addressed... to whom?
     {94}

        XXII

     I've known too many a haughty beauty,
     cold, pure as ice, and as unkind,
     inexorably wed to duty,
     unfathomable to the mind;
     shocked by their modish pride, and fleeing
     the utter virtue of their being,
     I've run a mile, I must avow,
     having decyphered on their brow
     hell's terrifying imprecation:
     ``Abandon hope for evermore.''9
     Our love is what they most abhor;
     our terror is their consolation.
     Ladies of such a cast, I think,
     you too have seen on Neva's brink.

        XXIII

     Thronged by adorers, I've detected
     another, freakish one, who stays
     quite self-absorbed and unaffected
     by sighs of passion or by praise.
     To my astonishment I've seen her,
     having by her severe demeanour
     frightened to death a timid love,
     revive it with another shove --
     at least by a regretful kindness;
     at least her tone is sometimes found
     more tender than it used to sound.
     I've seen how, trustful in his blindness,
     the youthful lover once again
     runs after what is sweet, and vain.
     {95}

        XXIV

     Why is Tatyana guiltier-seeming?
     is it that she, poor simple sweet,
     believes in her elected dreaming
     and has no knowledge of deceit?
     that, artless, and without concealing,
     her love obeys the laws of feeling,
     that she's so trustful, and imbued
     by heaven with such an unsubdued
     imagination, with such reason,
     such stubborn brain, and vivid will,
     and heart so tender, it can still
     burst to a fiery blaze in season?
     Such feckless passion -- as I live,
     is this then what you can't forgive?

        XXV

     The flirt has reason's cool volition;
     Tatyana's love is no by-play,
     she yields to it without condition
     like a sweet child. She'll never say:
     ``By virtue of procrastinating
     we'll keep love's price appreciating,
     we'll draw it deeper in our net;
     first, we'll take vanity, and let
     hope sting it, then we'll try deploying
     doubts, to exhaust the heart, then fire
     jealousy's flame, to light desire;
     else, having found his pleasure cloying,
     the cunning prisoner can quite well
     at any hour escape his cell.''
     {96}

        XXVI

     I see another problem looming:
     to save the honour of our land
     I must translate -- there's no presuming --
     the letter from Tatyana's hand:
     her Russian was as thin as vapour,
     she never read a Russian paper,
     our native speech had never sprung
     unhesitating from her tongue,
     she wrote in French... what a confession!
     what can one do? as said above,
     until this day, a lady's love
     in Russian never found expression,
     till now our language -- proud, God knows --
     has hardly mastered postal prose.

        XXVII

     They should be forced to read in Russian,
     I hear you say. But can you see
     a lady -- what a grim discussion! --
     with The Well-Meaner10 on her knee?
     I ask you, each and every poet!
     the darling objects -- don't you know it? --
     for whom, to expiate your crimes,
     you've made so many secret rhymes,
     to whom your hearts are dedicated,
     is it not true that Russian speech,
     so sketchily possessed by each,
     by all is sweetly mutilated,
     and it's the foreign phrase that trips
     like native idiom from their lips?
     {97}

        XXVIII

     Protect me from such apparition
     on dance-floor, at breakup of ball,
     as bonneted Academician
     or seminarist in yellow shawl!
     To me, unsmiling lips bring terror,
     however scarlet; free from error
     of grammar, Russian language too.
     Now, to my cost it may be true
     that generations of new beauties,
     heeding the press, will make us look
     more closely at the grammar-book;
     that verse will turn to useful duties;
     on me, all this has no effect:
     tradition still keeps my respect.

        XXIX

     No, incorrect and careless chatter,
     words mispronounced, thoughts ill-expressed
     evoke emotion's pitter-patter,
     now as before, inside my breast;
     too weak to change, I'm staying vicious,
     I still find Gallicism delicious
     as youthful sinning, or the strains
     of Bogdanóvich's11 refrains.
     But that's enough. My beauty's letter
     must now employ my pen; somehow
     I gave my word, alas, though now
     a blank default would suit me better.
     I own it: tender Parny's12 rhyme
     is out of fashion in our time.
     {98}

        XXX

     Bard13 of The Feasts, and heart's depression,
     if you'd still been with me, dear friend,
     I would have had the indiscretion
     to ask of you that you transcend
     in music's own bewitching fashion
     the foreign words a maiden's passion
     found for its utterance that night.
     Where are you? come -- and my own right
     with an obeisance I'll hand over...
     But he, by sad and rocky ways,
     with heart that's grown unused to praise,
     on Finland's coast a lonely rover --
     he doesn't hear when I address
     his soul with murmurs of distress.

        XXXI

     Tatyana's letter, treasured ever
     as sacred, lies before me still.
     I read with secret pain, and never
     can read enough to get my fill.
     Who taught her an address so tender,
     such careless language of surrender?
     Who taught her all this mad, slapdash,
     heartfelt, imploring, touching trash
     fraught with enticement and disaster?
     It baffles me. But I'll repeat
     here a weak version, incomplete,
     pale transcript of a vivid master,
     or Freischütz as it might be played
     by nervous hands of a schoolmaid:
     {99}

        Tatyana's Letter to Onegin

     ``I write to you -- no more confession
     is needed, nothing's left to tell.
     I know it's now in your discretion
     with scorn to make my world a hell.

     ``But, if you've kept some faint impression
     of pity for my wretched state,
     you'll never leave me to my fate.
     At first I thought it out of season
     to speak; believe me: of my shame
     you'd not so much as know the name,
     if I'd possessed the slightest reason
     to hope that even once a week
     I might have seen you, heard you speak
     on visits to us, and in greeting
     I might have said a word, and then
     thought, day and night, and thought again
     about one thing, till our next meeting.
     But you're not sociable, they say:
     you find the country godforsaken;
     though we... don't shine in any way,
     our joy in you is warmly taken.

     ``Why did you visit us, but why?
     Lost in our backwoods habitation
     I'd not have known you, therefore I
     would have been spared this laceration.
     In time, who knows, the agitation
     of inexperience would have passed,
     I would have found a friend, another,
     and in the role of virtuous mother
     and faithful wife I'd have been cast.
     {100}

     ``Another!... No, another never
     in all the world could take my heart!
     Decreed in highest court for ever...
     heaven's will -- for you I'm set apart;
     and my whole life has been directed
     and pledged to you, and firmly planned:
     I know, Godsent one, I'm protected
     until the grave by your strong hand:
     you'd made appearance in my dreaming;
     unseen, already you were dear,
     my soul had heard your voice ring clear,
     stirred at your gaze, so strange, so gleaming,
     long, long ago... no, that could be
     no dream. You'd scarce arrived, I reckoned
     to know you, swooned, and in a second
     all in a blaze, I said: it's he!

     ``You know, it's true, how I attended,
     drank in your words when all was still --
     helping the poor, or while I mended
     with balm of prayer my torn and rended
     spirit that anguish had made ill.
     At this midnight of my condition,
     was it not you, dear apparition,
     who in the dark came flashing through
     and, on my bed-head gently leaning,
     with love and comfort in your meaning,
     spoke words of hope? But who are you:
     the guardian angel of tradition,
     or some vile agent of perdition
     sent to seduce? Resolve my doubt.
     Oh, this could all be false and vain,
     a sham that trustful souls work out;
     {101}
     fate could be something else again..,

     ``So let it be! for you to keep
     I trust my fate to your direction,
     henceforth in front of you I weep,
     I weep, and pray for your protection..,
     Imagine it: quite on my own
     I've no one here who comprehends me,
     and now a swooning mind attends me,
     dumb I must perish, and alone.
     My heart awaits you: you can turn it
     to life and hope with just a glance --
     or else disturb my mournful trance
     with censure -- I've done all to earn it!

     ``I close. I dread to read this page...
     for shame and fear my wits are sliding...
     and yet your honour is my gage
     and in it boldly I'm confiding''...
     {102}

        XXXII

     Now Tanya's groaning, now she's sighing;
     the letter trembles in her grip;
     the rosy sealing-wafer's drying
     upon her feverish tongue; the slip
     from off her charming shoulder's drooping,
     and sideways her poor head is stooping.
     But now the radiance of the moon
     is dimmed. Down there the valley soon
     comes clearer through the mists of dawning.
     Down there, by slow degrees, the stream
     has taken on a silvery gleam;
     the herdsman's horn proclaimed the morning
     and roused the village long ago:
     to Tanya, all's an empty show.

        XXXIII

     She's paid the sunrise no attention,
     she sits with head sunk on her breast,
     over the note holds in suspension
     her seal with its engraven crest.
     Softly the door is opened, enter
     grey Filatevna, to present her
     with a small tray and a teacup.
     ``Get up, my child, it's time, get up!
     Why, pretty one, you're up already!
     My early bird! you know, last night
     you gave me such a shocking fright!
     but now, thank God, you're well and steady,
     your night of fretting's left no trace!
     fresh as a poppy-flower, your face.''
     {103}

        XXXIV

     ``Oh nurse, a favour, a petition...''
     ``Command me, darling, as you choose.''
     ``Now don't suppose... let no suspicion...
     but, nurse, you see... Oh, don't refuse...''
     ``My sweet, God warrants me your debtor.''
     ``Then send your grandson with this letter
     quickly to O... I mean to that...
     the neighbour... you must tell the brat
     that not a syllable be uttered
     and not a mention of my name...''
     ``Which neighbour, dear? My head became
     in these last years all mixed and fluttered.
     We've many neighbours round about;
     even to count them throws me out.''

        XXXV

     ``How slow you are at guessing, nyanya!''
     ``My sweet, my dearest heart, I'm old,
     I'm old, my mind is blunted, Tanya;
     times were when I was sharp and bold:
     times were, when master's least suggestion...''
     ``Oh nyanya, nyanya, I don't question...
     what have your wits to do with me?
     Now here's a letter, as you see,
     addressed to Onegin''... ...'Well, that's easy.
     But don't be cross, my darling friend,
     you know I'm hard to comprehend...
     Why have you gone all pale and queasy?''
     ``It's nothing, nurse, nothing, I say...
     just send your grandson on his way.''
     {104}

        XXXVI

     Hours pass; no answer; waiting, waiting.
     No word: another day goes by.
     She's dressed since dawn, dead pale; debating,
     demanding: when will he reply?
     Olga's adorer comes a-wooing.
     ``Tell me, what's your companion doing?''
     enquired the lady of the hall:
     ``it seems that he forgot us all.''
     Tatyana flushed, and started shaking.
     ``Today he promised he'd be here,''
     so Lensky answered the old dear:
     ``the mail explains the time he's taking.''
     Tatyana lowered her regard
     as at a censure that was hard.

        XXXVII

     Day faded; on the table, glowing,
     the samovar of evening boiled,
     and warmed the Chinese teapot; flowing
     beneath it, vapour wreathed and coiled.
     Already Olga's hand was gripping
     the urn of perfumed tea, and tipping
     into the cups its darkling stream --
     meanwhile a hallboy handed cream;
     before the window taking station,
     plunged in reflection's deepest train,
     Tatyana breathed on the cold pane,
     and in the misted condensation
     with charming forefinger she traced
     ``OE'' devotedly inlaced.
     {105}

        XXXVIII

     Meanwhile with pain her soul was girdled,
     and tears were drowning her regard.
     A sudden clatter!... blood was curdled...
     Now nearer... hooves... and in the yard
     Evgeny! ``Ah!'' Tatyana, fleeting
     light as a shadow, shuns a meeting,
     through the back porch runs out and flies
     down to the garden, and her eyes
     daren't look behind her; fairly dashing --
     beds, bridges, lawn, she never stops,
     the allée to the lake, the copse;
     breaking the lilac bushes, smashing
     parterres, she runs to rivulet's brink,
     to gasp, and on a bench to sink.

        XXXIX

     She dropped... ``It's he! Eugene arriving!
     Oh God, what did he think!'' A dream
     of hope is somehow still surviving
     in her torn heart -- a fickle gleam;
     she trembles, and with fever drumming
     awaits him -- hears nobody coming.
     Maidservants on the beds just now
     were picking berries from the bough,
     singing in chorus as directed
     (on orders which of course presume
     that thievish mouths cannot consume
     their masters' berries undetected
     so long as they're employed in song:
     such rustic cunning can't be wrong!) --
     {106}

        The Song of the Girls

     ``Maidens, pretty maidens all,
     dear companions, darling friends,
     pretty maidens, romp away,
     have your fill of revelry!
     Strike the ditty up, my sweets,
     ditty of our secret world,
     and entice a fellow in
     to the circle of our dance.
     When we draw a fellow in,
     when we see him from afar,
     darlings, then we'll run away,
     cherries then we'll throw at him,
     cherries throw and raspberries
     and redcurrants throw at him.
     Never come and overhear
     ditties of our secret world,
     never come and like a spy
     watch the games we maidens play.''
     {107}

        XL

     They sing; unmoved by their sweet-sounding
     choruses, Tanya can but wait,
     listless, impatient, for the pounding
     within her bosom to abate,
     and for her cheeks to cease their blushing;
     but wildly still her heart is rushing,
     and on her cheeks the fever stays,
     more and more brightly still they blaze.
     So the poor butterfly will quiver
     and beat a nacreous wing when caught
     by some perverse schoolboy for sport;
     and so in winter-fields will shiver
     the hare who from afar has seen
     a marksman crouching in the green.

        XLI

     But finally she heaved a yearning
     sigh, and stood up, began to pace;
     she walked, but just as she was turning
     into the allée, face to face,
     she found Evgeny, eyes a-glitter,
     still as a shadow, grim and bitter;
     seared as by fire, she stopped. Today
     I lack the strength required to say
     what came from this unlooked-for meeting;
     my friends, I need to pause a spell,
     and walk, and breathe, before I tell
     a story that still wants completing;
     I need to rest from all this rhyme:
     I'll end my tale some other time.
     {108}

        Notes to Chapter Three

     1 Stanza left incomplete by Pushkin.
     2 Heroine of Zhukovsky's poem of the same name.
     3 Julie, ou la nouvelle Héloise. by Rousseau, 1761.
     4 Hero of Mathilde, by Sophie Cottin, 1805.
     5 Lover of Valérie, by Madame de Krudener, 1803.
     6 Delphine, by Madame de Staël, 1805.
     7 Melmoth the Wanderer, by C. R. Mathurin, 1820.
     8 Jean Sbogar, by Charles Nodier, 1818.
     9  ``Lasciate  ogni  speranza, voi ch'entrate.  Our modest  author  has
translated only the first part of the famous verse.'' Pushkin's note.
     10 Magazine (1818) edited by A. Izmaylov.
     11 Russian poet and translator from the French.
     12 French poet (1755-1814). Author of Poésies Erotiques.
     13 Evgeny Baratynsky (1800-1844). Poet and friend of Pushkin.

--------
Chapter Four


          La morale est dans la nature des choses.
           Necker

        (I, II, III, IV, V, VI,1) VII

     With womankind, the less we love them,
     the easier they become to charm,
     the tighter we can stretch above them
     enticing nets to do them harm.
     There was a period when cold-blooded
     debauchery was praised, and studied
     as love's technique, when it would blare
     its own perfection everywhere,
     and heartless pleasure was up-graded;
     yes, these were our forefathers' ways,
     those monkeys of the good old days:
     now Lovelace's renown has faded
     as scarlet heels have lost their name
     and stately periwigs, their fame.
     {109}

        VIII

     How dull are acting and evasion,
     diversely urging the same plea,
     earnestly striving for persuasion
     on points that all long since agree --
     and always the self-same objection;
     how dull to work for the correction
     of prejudice that's never been
     harboured by maidens of thirteen!
     Who's not disgusted by cajoling,
     threats, vows, and simulated fears,
     by six-page letters, rings and tears,
     gossip, and tricks, and the patrolling
     of aunts and mothers, and the thrall
     of husband's friendship -- worst of all!

        IX

     Evgeny thought in just this fashion.
     From his first youth he'd known the force,
     the sufferings of tempestuous passion;
     its winds had blown him far off course.
     Spoilt by the habit of indulgence,
     now dazzled by one thing's effulgence,
     now disenchanted with the next,
     more and more bored by yearning's text,
     bored by success' giddy trifle,
     he heard in stillness and in din
     a deathless murmur from within,
     found that in laughter yawns could stifle:
     he killed eight years in such a style,
     and wasted life's fine flower meanwhile.
     {110}

        X

     Though belles had lost his adoration,
     he danced attendance with the best;
     rebuffed, found instant consolation;
     deceived, was overjoyed to rest.
     He followed them without illusion,
     lost them without regret's contusion,
     scarcely recalled their love, their spite;
     just like a casual guest who might
     devote to whist an evening party,
     who'd sit, and at the end of play
     would say goodbye and drive away,
     go off to sleep quite hale and hearty,
     and in the morning wouldn't know
     that self-same evening where he'd go.

        XI

     Yet Tanya's note made its impression
     on Eugene, he was deeply stirred:
     that virgin dream and its confession
     filled him with thoughts that swarmed and whirred;
     the flower-like pallor of the maiden,
     her look, so sweetly sorrow-laden,
     all plunged his soul deep in the stream
     of a delicious, guiltless dream...
     and though perhaps old fires were thrusting
     and held him briefly in their sway,
     Eugene had no wish to betray
     a soul so innocent, so trusting.
     But to the garden, to the scene
     where Tanya now confronts Eugene.
     {111}

        XII

     Moments of silence, quite unbroken;
     then, stepping nearer, Eugene said:
     ``You wrote to me, and nothing spoken
     can disavow that. I have read
     those words where love, without condition,
     pours out its guiltless frank admission,
     and your sincerity of thought
     is dear to me, for it has brought
     feeling to what had long been heartless:
     but I won't praise you -- let me join
     and pay my debt in the same coin
     with an avowal just as artless;
     hear my confession as I stand
     I leave the verdict in your hand.

        XIII

     ``Could I be happy circumscribing
     my life in a domestic plot;
     had fortune blest me by prescribing
     husband and father as my lot;
     could I accept for just a minute
     the homely scene, take pleasure in it --
     then I'd have looked for you alone
     to be the bride I'd call my own.
     Without romance, or false insistence,
     I'll say: with past ideals in view
     I would have chosen none but you
     as helpmeet in my sad existence,
     as gage of all things that were good,
     and been as happy... as I could!
     {112}

        XIV

     ``But I was simply not intended
     for happiness -- that alien role.
     Should your perfections be expended
     in vain on my unworthy soul?
     Believe (as conscience is my warrant),
     wedlock for us would be abhorrent.
     I'd love you, but inside a day,
     with custom, love would fade away;
     your tears would flow -- but your emotion,
     your grief would fail to touch my heart,
     they'd just enrage it with their dart.
     What sort of roses, in your notion,
     would Hymen bring us -- blooms that might
     last many a day, and many a night!

        XV

     ``What in the world is more distressing
     than households where the wife must moan
     the unworthy husband through depressing
     daytimes and evenings passed alone?
     and where the husband, recognizing
     her worth (but anathematising
     his destiny) without a smile
     bursts with cold envy and with bile?
     For such am I. When you were speaking
     to me so simply, with the fires
     and force that purity inspires,
     is this the man that you were seeking?
     can it be true you must await
     from cruel fortune such a fate?
     {113}

        XVI

     ``I've dreams and years past resurrection;
     a soul that nothing can renew...
     I feel a brotherly affection,
     or something tenderer still, for you.
     Listen to me without resentment:
     girls often change to their contentment
     light dreams for new ones... so we see
     each springtime, on the growing tree,
     fresh leaves... for such is heaven's mandate.
     You'll love again, but you must teach
     your heart some self-restraint; for each
     and every man won't understand it
     as I have... learn from my belief
     that inexperience leads to grief.''

        XVII

     So went his sermon. Almost dying,
     blinded to everything about
     by mist of tears, without replying
     Tatyana heard Evgeny out.
     He gave his arm. In sad abstraction,
     by what's called machinal reaction,
     without a word Tatyana leant
     upon it, and with head down-bent
     walked homeward round the kitchen garden;
     together they arrived, and none
     dreamt of reproving what they'd done:
     by country freedom, rightful pardon
     and happy licence are allowed,
     as much as in Moscow the proud.
     {114}

        XVIII

     Agree, the way Eugene proceeded
     with our poor girl was kind and good;
     not for the first time he succeeded
     in manifesting, as he could,
     a truly noble disposition;
     yet people's malice and suspicion
     persisted and made no amends.
     By enemies, no less by friends
     (it's all the same -- you well correct us),
     he found all kinds of brickbat hurled.
     We each have enemies in this world,
     but from our friends, good Lord protect us!
     Those friends, those friends! it is, I fear,
     with cause that I've recalled them here.

        XIX

     What of it? Nothing. I'm just sending
     to sleep some black and empty dreams;
     but, inside brackets, I'm contending
     there's no ignoble tale that seems
     cooked-up where garret-vermin babble,
     endorsed by fashionable rabble,
     there's no absurdity as such,
     no vulgar epigram too much,
     which smilingly your friend, supported
     by decent company, has not,
     without a trace of spite or plot,
     a hundred times afresh distorted;
     yet he'd back you through thick and thin:
     he loves you... like your kith and kin!
     {115}

        XX

     Hm, hm. Distinguished reader, tell me
     how are your kith and kin today?
     And here my sentiments impel me
     for your enlightenment to say
     how I interpret this expression:
     our kin are folk whom by profession
     we have to cherish and admire
     with all our hearts, and who require
     that in the usual Christmas scrimmage
     we visit them, or without fail
     send them good wishes through the mail
     to ensure that till next time our image
     won't even cross their minds by stealth...
     God grant them years and years of health!

        XXI

     Of course, the love of tender beauties,
     surer than friendship or than kin,
     will loyally discharge its duties,
     in midst of trouble, storm or din.
     Of course. Yet fashion's wild rotation,
     yet a capricious inclination,
     yet floods of talk around the town...
     the darling sex is light as down.
     Then verdicts from her husband's quartet
     are bound, by every virtuous wife,
     to be respected all through life:
     and so your faithfullest supporter
     will disappear as fast as smoke:
     for Satan, love's a splendid joke.
     {116}

        XXII

     Whom then to credit? Whom to treasure?
     On whom alone can we depend?
     Who is there who will truly measure
     his acts and words to suit our end?
     Who'll sow no calumnies around us?
     Whose fond attentions will astound us?
     Who'll never fault our vices, or
     whom shall we never find a bore?
     Don't let a ghost be your bear-leader,
     don't waste your efforts on the air.
     Just let yourself be your whole care,
     your loved one, honourable reader!
     Deserving object: there can be
     nothing more lovable than he.

        XXIII

     Then what resulted from the meeting?
     Alas, it's not so hard to guess!
     Love's frantic torments went on beating
     and racking with their strain and stress
     that youthful soul, which pined for sadness;
     no, all devoured by passion's madness
     poor Tanya more intensely burns;
     sleep runs from her, she turns and turns...
     and health, life's sweetness and its shimmer,
     smiles, and a maiden's tranquil poise,
     have vanished, like an empty noise,
     while dear Tatyana's youth grows dimmer:
     so a storm-shadow wraps away
     in dark attire the new-born day.
     {117}

        XXIV

     Poor Tanya's bloom begins to languish,
     and pale, and fade without a word!
     there's nothing can employ her anguish,
     no sound by which her soul is stirred.
     Neighbours in whispered tones are taking
     council, and with profound head-shaking
     conclude that it's high time she wed!...
     But that's enough. At once, in stead,
     I'll gladden your imagination,
     reader, by painting you a scene
     of happy love. For I have been
     too long, against my inclination,
     held in constraint by pity's touch:
     I love my Tatyana too much!

        XXV

     From hour to hour a surer capture
     for Olga's beauty, Lensky gives
     his soul to a delicious rapture
     that fills him and in which he lives.
     He's always with her: either seated
     in darkness in her room, or treated
     to garden walks, as arm in arm
     they while away the morning's calm.
     What else? Quite drunk with love's illusion,
     he even dares, once in a while,
     emboldened by his Olga's smile,
     and plunged in tender shame's confusion,
     to play with a dishevelled tress,
     or kiss the border of her dress.
     {118}

        XXVI

     He reads to Olga on occasion,
     for her improvement, a roman,
     of moralistical persuasion,
     more searching than Chateaubriand;
     but in it there are certain pages
     (vain twaddle, fables of the ages,
     talk that might turn a young girl's head)
     which with a blush he leaves unread.
     As far removed as they were able
     from all the world, they sat and pored
     in deepest thought at the chess-board
     for hours, with elbows on the table --
     then Lensky moved his pawn, and took,
     deep in distraction, his own rook.

        XXVII

     Even at home his occupation
     is only Olga: he relieves
     with careful schemes of decoration
     an album's loose and floating sheaves.
     Sometimes a landscape's represented,
     a tomb, a Cyprian shrine's invented,
     a lyre, and on it perched, a dove --
     in ink with colour-wash above;
     then on the leaves of recollection,
     below the others who have signed
     he leaves a tender verse behind,
     a dream's mute monument, reflection
     of instant thoughts, a fleeting trace
     still after many years in place.
     {119}

        XXVIII

     Often of course you'll have inspected
     the album of a country miss
     where scribbling friends have interjected
     frontwise and back, that way and this.
     With spelling scrambled to perdition,
     the unmetric verses of tradition
     are entered here, in friendship's gage,
     shortened, or lengthened off the page.
     On the first sheet you'll find a question:
     ``Qu'écrirez-vous sur ces tablettes?''
     and, under, ``toute à vous Annette'';
     then, on the last page, the suggestion:
     ``who loves you more than I, let's see
     him prove it, writing after me.''

        XXIX

     There you're entirely sure of finding
     two hearts, a torch, and a nosegay;
     and there, love's protestations, binding
     until the tombstone; there one day
     some regimental bard has added
     a stanza villainously padded.
     In such an album, friends, I too
     am always glad to write, it's true,
     convinced at heart that my most zealous
     nonsense will earn indulgent looks,
     nor will my scribbling in such books
     attract the sneering of the jealous,
     or make men seriously discuss
     if I show wit in jesting thus.
     {120}

        XXX

     But you, grand tomes I loathe with passion,
     odd volumes from the devil's shelf,
     in which the rhymester-man-of-fashion
     is forced to crucify himself,
     portfolios nobly illustrated
     with Tolstoy's2 brush, or decorated
     by Baratynsky's3 wondrous pen,
     God's thunder burn you up! And when
     some splendid lady is referring
     to me her best in-quarto tome,
     the fear and rage with which I foam!
     Deep down, an epigram is stirring
     that I'm just longing to indite --
     but madrigals I've got to write!

        XXXI

     No madrigals were for inscribing
     by Lensky in his Olga's book;
     his style breathed love, and not the gibing
     coldness of wit; each note he took,
     each news of her he'd been imbibing --
     all was material for transcribing:
     with lively and pellucid look,
     his elegies flow like a brook.
     So you, inspired Yazýkov,4 sobbing
     with bursts of passion from the heart,
     sing God knows whom, compose with art
     a suite of elegies that, throbbing,
     sooner or later will relate
     the entire story of your fate.
     {121}

        XXXII

     But soft! You hear? A scowling critic,
     bidding us to reject for good
     the elegy, grown paralytic,
     commands our rhymester-brotherhood:
     ``oh, quit your stale, your tedious quacking,
     and your alas-ing and alack-ing
     about what's buried in the past:
     sing about something else at last!''
     All right, you want the resurrection
     of trumpet, dagger, mask and sword,
     and dead ideas from that old hoard,
     all brought to life at your direction.
     Not so? ``No, sirs, the ode's the thing,
     that's the refrain that you should sing,

        XXXIII

     ``as sung of old, in years of glory,
     as instituted long ago.''
     Only the ode, that solemn story!
     Enough, my friends; it's all so-so.
     Remember the retort satiric!
     Is Others' View,5 that clever lyric,
     really more bearable to you
     than what our sorrowing rhymesters do?
     ``The elegy's just vain protesting,
     empty the purpose it proclaims,
     while odes have high and noble aims...''
     That point I wouldn't mind contesting,
     but hold my tongue, lest it appears
     I'll set two ages by the ears.
     {122}

        XXXIV

     In love with fame, by freedom smitten,
     with storm and tumult in his head,
     what odes Vladimir might have written --
     but Olga would have never read!
     Bards of our tearful generation,
     have you read lines of your creation
     to your loved ones? They do maintain
     that this of all things for a swain
     is the supreme reward. Precisely,
     blest the poor lover who reads out
     his dreams, while she whom they're about,
     that languid beauty, listens nicely --
     blest... though perhaps her fancy's caught
     in fact by some quite different thought.

        XXXV

     But I myself read my bedizened
     fancies, my rhythmic search for truth,
     to nobody except a wizened
     nanny, companion of my youth;
     or, after some dull dinner's labour,
     I buttonhole a wandering neighbour
     and in a corner make him choke
     on tragedy; but it's no joke,
     when, utterly worn out by rhyming,
     exhausted and done up, I take
     a rambling walk beside my lake,
     and duck get up; with instant timing,
     alarmed by my melodious lay,
     they leave their shores and fly away.
     {123}

        XXXVI6

     < My gaze pursues them... but on station
     the hunter in the wood will swear
     at verse, and hiss an imprecation,
     and ease his catch with all due care.
     We each enjoy a special hobby,
     each of us has his favourite lobby:
     one sees a duck and aims his gun,
     one raves in verse like me, and one
     hunts cheeky flies, with swatter sweeping,
     one leads the multitude in thought,
     one finds in war amusing sport,
     one wallows in delicious weeping;
     the wine-addict adores the cup:
     and good and bad are all mixed up. >

        XXXVII

     But what about Eugene? With reason
     reader, you ask, and I'll expound --
     craving your tolerance in season --
     the programme of his daily round.
     In summertime -- for he was leading
     a hermit's life -- he'd be proceeding
     on foot, by seven o'clock, until
     he reached the stream below the hill;
     lightly attired, like the creator
     of Gulnare, he would play a card
     out of the hand of that same bard:
     he'd swim this Hellespont; then later
     he'd drink his coffee, flutter through
     the pages of some dull review,
     then dress...
     {124}

        (XXXVIII) XXXIX

     Books, riding, walks, sleep heavy-laden,
     the shady wood, the talking stream;
     sometimes from a fair, black-eyed maiden
     the kiss where youth and freshness gleam;
     a steed responsive to the bridle,
     and dinner with a touch of idle
     fancy, a wine serene in mood,
     tranquillity, and solitude --
     Onegin's life, you see, was holy;
     unconsciously he let it mount
     its grip on him, forgot to count
     bright summer days that passed so slowly,
     forgot to think of town and friends
     and tedious means to festive ends.

        XL

     Our evanescent northern summer
     parodies winter in the south;
     it's like a vanishing newcomer --
     but here we must control our mouth.
     The sky breathed autumn, time was flowing,
     and good old sun more seldom glowing;
     the days grew shorter, in the glade
     with mournful sound the secret shade
     was stripped away, and mists encroaching
     lay on the fields; in caravan
     the clamorous honking geese began
     their southward flight: one saw approaching
     the season which is such a bore --
     November stood outside the door.
     {125}

        XLI

     Dawn comes in mist and chill; no longer
     do fields echo with work and shout;
     in pairs, their hunger driving stronger,
     on the highroad the wolves come out;
     the horse gets wind of them and, snorting,
     sets the wise traveller cavorting
     up the hillside at breakneck pace;
     no longer does the herdsman chase
     his beasts outdoors at dawn, nor ringing
     at noontime does his horn resound
     as it assembles them around;
     while in the hut a girl is singing;
     she spins and, friend of winter nights,
     the matchwood chatters as it lights.

        XLII

     Hoar-frost that crackles with a will is
     already silvering all the plain...
     (the reader thinks the rhyme is lilies:
     here, seize it quick for this quatrain!)
     Like modish parquetry, the river
     glitters beneath its icing-sliver;
     boy-tribes with skates on loudly slice
     their joyous way across the ice;
     a red-foot goose, weight something fearful,
     anticipates a swim, in stead
     tries out the ice with cautious tread,
     and skids and tumbles down; the cheerful
     first flakes of snow whirl round and sink
     in stars upon the river-brink.
     {126}

        XLIII

     In backwoods, how d'you pass this season?
     Walking? The country that you roam
     is a compulsive bore by reason
     of its unvarnished monochrome.
     Riding on the lugubrious prairie?
     Your horse, blunt-shoed and all unwary,
     will find the ice elude his grip
     and, any moment, down he'll slip.
     Or, in your lonely homestead, moping,
     you'll read: here's Pradt,7 here's Walter Scott!
     to pass the evening. No? then tot
     up your accounts, and raging, toping,
     let evening pass, tomorrow too --
     in triumph you'll see winter through!

        XLIV

     Childe-Harold-like, Eugene's devoting
     his hours to dreaming them away:
     he wakes; a bath where ice is floating;
     and then, indoors the livelong day,
     alone, and sunk in calculation,
     with a blunt cue for the duration,
     from early morning on he will
     at two-ball billiards prove his skill;
     then, country evening fast arriving,
     billiards are dropped, cue put to bed:
     before the fire a table's spread;
     Evgeny waits: and here comes driving,
     with three roan horses in a line
     Vladimir Lensky. Quick, let's dine!
     {127}

        XLV

     From widow Clicquot and from Moët,
     the draught whose blessings are agreed,
     in frosted bottle, for the poet
     is brought to table at full speed.
     Bubbles like Hippocrene are spraying;
     once, with its foaming and its playing,
     (a simile of this and that)
     it held me captive; tit for tat,
     friends, recollect how I surrendered
     my last poor lepton for a sup!
     recall, by its bewitching cup,
     how many follies were engendered;
     how many lines of verse, and themes
     for jokes, and rows, and merry dreams!

        XLVI

     Yet hissing froth deals a malicious,
     perfidious blow to my inside,
     and now it's Bordeaux the Judicious
     that I prefer to Champagne's tide;
     to Aÿ's vintage in the sequel
     I find myself no longer equal;
     for, mistress-like, it's brilliant, vain,
     lively, capricious, and inane...
     But in misfortune or displeasure,
     Bordeaux, you're like a faithful friend,
     a true companion to the end,
     ready to share our quiet leisure
     with your good offices, and so
     long life to our dear friend, Bordeaux!
     {128}

        XLVII

     The fire was dying; cinders faintly
     covered the golden coal -- the steam
     tumbled and whirled and twisted quaintly
     its barely noticeable stream.
     The hearth was low beyond all stoking.
     Straight up the chimney, pipes were smoking.
     Still on the board, the beakers hissed,
     and evening now drew on in mist...
     (I like a friendly conversation,
     the enjoyment of a friendly drink,
     at hours, which, why I cannot think,
     somehow have got the designation
     of time between the wolf and dog.)
     Now hear the friends in dialogue:

        XLVIII

     ``Tell me, our neighbours, are they thriving?
     and how's Tatyana? Olga too,
     your dashing one, is she surviving?''
     ``Just half a glass more... that will do...
     All flourishing; they send their duty.
     Take Olga's shoulders now -- the beauty!
     What breasts! What soul!... We'll go one day
     visit the family, what d'you say?
     if you come with me, they'll be flattered;
     or else, my friend, how does it look?
     you called there twice, and since then took
     no notice of them. But I've chattered
     so much, I'm left no time to speak!
     of course! you're bidden there next week.''
     {129}

        XLIX

     ``I?'' ``Saturday. The invitation
     Olinka and her mother sent:
     Tatyana's name day celebration.
     It's right and proper that you went.''
     ``But there'll be such a rout and scrabble
     with every different kind of rabble...''
     ``No, no, I'm sure the party's small.
     Relations. No-one else at all.
     Let's go, our friendship's worth the labour!''
     ``All right, I'll come then...'' ``What a friend!''
     He drained his glass down to the end
     by way of toast to their fair neighbour;
     then he began to talk once more
     of Olga: love's that kind of bore!

        L

     Lensky rejoiced. His designated
     rapture was just two weeks ahead;
     love's crown, delectable, awaited
     his transports, and the marriage-bed
     in all its mystery. Hymen's teasing,
     the pain, the grief, the marrow-freezing
     onset of the incipient yawn,
     were from his vision quite withdrawn.
     While under the connubial banner
     I can see naught, as Hymen's foe,
     beyond a string of dull tableaux,
     a novel in Lafontaine's8 manner...
     my wretched Lensky in his heart
     was just created for the part.
     {130}

        LI

     And he was loved... at least he never
     doubted of it, so lived in bliss.
     Happy a hundredfold, whoever
     can lean on faith, who can dismiss
     cold reason, sleep in sensual welter
     like a drunk traveller in a shelter,
     or, sweeter, like a butterfly
     in flowers of spring it's drinking dry:
     but piteous he, the all-foreseeing,
     the sober head, detesting each
     human reaction, every speech
     in the expression of its being,
     whose heart experience has cooled
     and saved from being charmed or fooled!
     {131}

        Notes to Chapter Four

     1 Stanzas I to VI were discarded by Pushkin.
     2 Count F. P. Tolstoy (1783-1873), well-known artist.
     3 See Chapter Three, note 13.
     4 Poet and acquaintance of Pushkin.
     5 Satiric poem by Ivan Dimitriev, 1795. The reference is -- summarizing
very briefly -- to a  controversy between different literary  cliques  about
the relative merits of the classic ode and the romantic elegy.
     6 Stanza discarded by Pushkin, also stanza XXXVIII.
     7 Dominique de Pradt (1759-1837), voluminous French political writer.
     8 August Lafontaine (1758-1851), German novelist of family life.

--------
Chapter Five


          O, never know these frightful dreams,
          thou, my Svetlana!
           Zhukovsky

        I

     That year the season was belated
     and autumn lingered, long and slow;
     expecting winter, nature waited --
     only in January the snow,
     night of the second, started flaking.
     Next day Tatyana, early waking,
     saw through the window, morning-bright,
     roofs, flowerbeds, fences, all in white,
     panes patterned by the finest printer,
     with trees decked in their silvery kit,
     and jolly magpies on the flit,
     and hills that delicately winter
     had with its brilliant mantle crowned --
     and glittering whiteness all around.
     {132}

        II

     Winter!... The countryman, enchanted,
     breaks a new passage with his sleigh;
     his nag has smelt the snow, and planted
     a shambling hoof along the way;
     a saucy kibítka is slicing
     its furrow through the powdery icing;
     the driver sits and cuts a dash
     in sheepskin coat with scarlet sash.
     Here comes the yard-boy, who has chosen
     his pup to grace the sledge, while he
     becomes a horse for all to see;
     the rogue has got a finger frozen:
     it hurts, he laughs, and all in vain
     his mother taps the window-pane.

        III

     But you perhaps find no attraction
     in any picture of this kind:
     for nature's unadorned reaction
     has something low and unrefined.
     Fired by the god of inspiration,
     another bard1 in exaltation
     has painted for us the first snow
     with each nuance of wintry glow:
     he'll charm you with his fine invention,
     he'll take you prisoner, you'll admire
     secret sledge-rides in verse of fire;
     but I've not got the least intention
     just now of wrestling with his shade,
     nor his,2 who sings of Finland's maid.
     {133}

        IV

     Tanya (profoundly Russian being,
     herself not knowing how or why)
     in Russian winters thrilled at seeing
     the cold perfection of the sky,
     hoar-frost and sun in freezing weather,
     sledges, and tardy dawns together
     with the pink glow the snows assume
     and festal evenings in the gloom.
     The Larins kept the old tradition:
     maid-servants from the whole estate
     would on those evenings guess the fate
     of the two girls; their premonition
     pointed each year, for time to come,
     at soldier-husbands, and the drum.

        V

     Tatyana shared with full conviction
     the simple faith of olden days
     in dreams and cards and their prediction,
     and portents of the lunar phase.
     Omens dismayed her with their presage;
     each object held a secret message
     for her instruction, and her breast
     was by forebodings much oppressed.
     The tomcat, mannered and affected,
     that sat above the stove and purred
     and washed its face, to her brought word
     that visitors must be expected.
     If suddenly aloft she spied
     the new moon, horned, on her left side,
     {134}

        VI

     her face would pale, she'd start to quiver.
     In the dark sky, a shooting star
     that fell, and then began to shiver,
     would fill Tatyana from afar
     with perturbation and with worry;
     and while the star still flew, she'd hurry
     to whisper it her inmost prayer.
     And if she happened anywhere
     to meet a black monk, or if crossing
     her path a hare in headlong flight
     ran through the fields, sheer panic fright
     would leave her dithering and tossing.
     By dire presentiment awestruck,
     already she'd assume ill-luck.

        VII

     Yet -- fear itself she found presented
     a hidden beauty in the end:
     our disposition being invented
     by nature, contradiction's friend.
     Christmas came on. What joy, what gladness!
     Yes, youth divines, in giddy madness,
     youth which has nothing to regret,
     before which life's horizon yet
     lies bright, and vast beyond perceiving;
     spectacled age divines as well,
     although it's nearly heard the knell,
     and all is lost beyond retrieving;
     no matter: hope, in child's disguise,
     is there to lisp its pack of lies.
     {135}

        VIII

     Tatyana looks with pulses racing
     at sunken wax inside a bowl:
     beyond a doubt, its wondrous tracing
     foretells for her some wondrous role;
     from dish of water, rings are shifted
     in due succession; hers is lifted
     and at the very self-same time
     the girls sing out the ancient rhyme:
     ``The peasants there have wealth abounding,
     they heap up silver with a spade;
     and those we sing for will be paid
     in goods and fame!'' But the sad-sounding
     ditty portends a loss; more dear
     is ``Kit''3 to every maiden's ear.

        IX

     The sky is clear, the earth is frozen;
     the heavenly lights in glorious quire
     tread the calm, settled path they've chosen...
     Tatyana in low-cut attire
     goes out into the courtyard spaces
     and trains a mirror till it faces
     the moon; but in the darkened glass
     the only face to shake and pass
     is sad old moon's... Hark! snow is creaking...
     a passer-by; and on tiptoe
     she flies as fast as she can go;
     and ``what's your name?'' she asks him, speaking
     in a melodious, flute-like tone.
     He looks, and answers: ``Agafon.''4
     {136}

        X

     Prepared for prophecy and fable,
     she did what nurse advised she do
     and in the bath-house had a table
     that night, in secret, set for two;
     then sudden fear attacked Tatyana...
     I too -- when I recall Svetlana5
     I'm terrified -- so let it be...
     Tatyana's rites are not for me.
     She's dropped her sash's silken billow;
     Tanya's undressed, and lies in bed.
     Lel6 floats about above her head;
     and underneath her downy pillow
     a young girl's looking-glass is kept.
     Now all was still. Tatyana slept.

        XI

     She dreamt of portents. In her dreaming
     she walked across a snowy plain
     through gloom and mist; and there came streaming
     a furious, boiling, heaving main
     across the drift-encumbered acres,
     a raging torrent, capped with breakers,
     a flood on which no frosty band
     had been imposed by winter's hand;
     two poles that ice had glued like plaster
     were placed across the gulf to make
     a flimsy bridge whose every quake
     spelt hazard, ruin and disaster;
     she stopped at the loud torrent's bound,
     perplexed... and rooted to the ground.
     {137}

        XII

     As if before some mournful parting
     Tatyana groaned above the tide;
     she saw no friendly figure starting
     to help her from the other side;
     but suddenly a snowdrift rumbled,
     and what came out? a hairy, tumbled,
     enormous bear; Tatyana yelled,
     the bear let out a roar, and held
     a sharp-nailed paw towards her; bracing
     her nerves, she leant on it her weight,
     and with a halting, trembling gait
     above the water started tracing
     her way; she passed, then as she walked
     the bear -- what next? -- behind her stalked.

        XIII

     A backward look is fraught with danger;
     she speeds her footsteps to a race,
     but from her shaggy-liveried ranger
     she can't escape at any pace --
     the odious bear still grunts and lumbers.
     Ahead of them a pinewood slumbers
     in the full beauty of its frown;
     the branches all are weighted down
     with tufts of snow; and through the lifted
     summits of aspen, birch and lime,
     the nightly luminaries climb.
     No path to see: the snow has drifted
     across each bush, across each steep,
     and all the world is buried deep.
     {138}

        XIV

     She's in the wood, the bear still trails her.
     There's powdery snow up to her knees;
     now a protruding branch assails her
     and clasps her neck; and now she sees
     her golden earrings off and whipping;
     and now the crunchy snow is stripping
     her darling foot of its wet shoe,
     her handkerchief has fallen too;
     no time to pick it up -- she's dying
     with fright, she hears the approaching bear;
     her fingers shake, she doesn't dare
     to lift her skirt up; still she's flying,
     and he pursuing, till at length
     she flies no more, she's lost her strength.

        XV

     She's fallen in the snow -- alertly
     the bear has raised her in his paws;
     and she, submissively, inertly --
     no move she makes, no breath she draws;
     he whirls her through the wood... a hovel
     shows up through trees, all of a grovel
     in darkest forest depths and drowned
     by dreary snowdrifts piled around;
     there's a small window shining in it,
     and from within come noise and cheer;
     the bear explains: ``my cousin's here --
     come in and warm yourself a minute!''
     he carries her inside the door
     and sets her gently on the floor.
     {139}

        XVI

     Tatyana looks, her faintness passes:
     bear's gone; a hallway, no mistake;
     behind the door the clash of glasses
     and shouts suggest a crowded wake;
     so, seeing there no rhyme or reason,
     no meaning in or out of season,
     she peers discreetly through a chink
     and sees... whatever do you think?
     a group of monsters round a table,
     a dog with horns, a goatee'd witch,
     a rooster head, and on the twitch
     a skeleton jerked by a cable,
     a dwarf with tail, and a half-strain,
     a hybrid cross of cat and crane.

        XVII

     But ever stranger and more fearful:
     a crayfish rides on spider-back;
     on goose's neck, a skull looks cheerful
     and swaggers in a red calpack;
     with bended knees a windmill dances,
     its sails go flap-flap as it prances;
     song, laughter, whistle, bark and champ,
     and human words, and horse's stamp!
     But how she jumped, when in this hovel
     among the guests she recognized
     the man she feared and idolized --
     who else? -- the hero of our novel!
     Onegin sits at table too,
     he eyes the door, looks slyly through.
     {140}

        XVIII

     He nods -- they start to fuss and truckle;
     he drinks -- all shout and take a swill;
     he laughs -- they all begin to chuckle;
     he scowls -- and the whole gang are still;
     he's host, that's obvious. Thus enlightened
     Tanya's no longer quite so frightened
     and, curious now about the lot,
     opens the door a tiny slot...
     but then a sudden breeze surprises,
     puts out the lamps; the whole brigade
     of house-familiars stands dismayed...
     with eyes aflame Onegin rises
     from table, clattering on the floor;
     all stand. He walks towards the door.

        XIX

     Now she's alarmed; in desperate worry
     Tatyana struggles to run out --
     she can't; and in her panic hurry
     she flails around, she tries to shout --
     she can't; Evgeny's pushed the portal,
     and to the vision of those mortal
     monsters the maiden stood revealed.
     Wildly the fearful laughter pealed;
     the eyes of all, the hooves, the snozzles,
     the bleeding tongues, the tufted tails,
     the tusks, the corpse's finger-nails,
     the horns, and the moustachio'd nozzles --
     all point at her, and all combine
     to bellow out: ``she's mine, she's mine.''
     {141}

        XX

     ``She's mine!'' Evgeny's voice of thunder
     clears in a flash the freezing room;
     the whole thieves' kitchen flies asunder,
     the girl remains there in the gloom
     alone with him; Onegin takes her
     into a corner, gently makes her
     sit on a flimsy bench, and lays
     his head upon her shoulder... blaze
     of sudden brightness... it's too curious...
     Olga's appeared upon the scene,
     and Lensky follows her... Eugene,
     eyes rolling, arms uplifted, furious,
     damns the intruders; Tanya lies
     and almost swoons, and almost dies.

        XXI

     Louder and louder sounds the wrangle:
     Eugene has caught up, quick as quick,
     a carving-knife -- and in the tangle
     Lensky's thrown down. The murk is thick
     and growing thicker; then, heart-shaking,
     a scream rings out... the cabin's quaking...
     Tanya comes to in utter fright...
     she looks, the room is getting light --
     outside, the scarlet rays of dawning
     play on the window's frosted lace;
     in through the door, at swallow's pace,
     pinker than glow of Northern morning,
     flits Olga: ``now, tell me straight out,
     who was it that you dreamt about?''
     {142}

        XXII

     Deaf to her sister's intervention,
     Tatyana simply lay in bed,
     devoured a book with rapt attention,
     and kept quite silent while she read.
     The book displayed, not so you'd know it,
     no magic fancies of the poet,
     no brilliant truth, no vivid scene;
     and yet by Vergil or Racine
     by Scott, by Seneca, or Byron,
     even by Ladies' Fashion Post,
     no one was ever so engrossed:
     Martin Zadéka was the siren,
     dean of Chaldea's learned team,
     arch-commentator of the dream.

        XXIII

     This work of the profoundest learning
     was brought there by a huckster who
     one day came down that lonely turning,
     and to Tanya, when he was through,
     swapped it for odd tomes of Malvina,
     but just to make the bargain keener,
     he charged three roubles and a half,
     and took two Petriads in calf,
     a grammar, a digest of fable,
     and volume three of Marmontel.
     Since then Martin Zadéka's spell
     bewitches Tanya... he is able
     to comfort her in all her woes,
     and every night shares her repose.
     {143}

        XXIV

     Tatyana's haunted by her vision,
     plagued by her ghastly dream, and tries
     to puzzle out with some precision
     just what the nightmare signifies.
     Searching the table exegetic
     she finds, in order alphabetic:
     bear, blackness, blizzard, bridge and crow,
     fir, forest, hedgehog, raven, snow
     etcetera. But her trepidation
     Martin Zadéka fails to mend;
     the horrid nightmare must portend
     a hideous deal of tribulation.
     For several days she peaked and pined
     in deep anxiety of mind.

        XXV

     But now Aurora's crimson fingers
     from daybreak valleys lift the sun;
     the morning light no longer lingers,
     the festal name day has begun.
     Since dawn, whole families have been driving
     towards the Larins' and arriving
     in sledded coaches and coupés,
     in britzkas, kibítkas and sleighs.
     The hall is full of noise and hustle,
     in the salon new faces meet,
     and kisses smack as young girls greet;
     there's yap of pugs, and laughs, and bustle;
     the threshold's thronged, wet-nurses call,
     guests bow, feet scrape, and children squall.
     {144}

        XXVI

     Here with his wife, that bulging charmer,
     fat Pústyakov has driven in;
     Gvozdín, exemplary farmer,
     whose serfs are miserably thin;
     and the Skotínins, grizzled sages,
     with broods of children of all ages,
     from thirty down to two; and stop,
     here's Petushkóv, the local fop;
     and look, my cousin's come, Buyánov,
     in a peaked cap, all dust and fluff, --
     you'll recognize him soon enough, --
     and counsellor (retired) Flyánov,
     that rogue, backbiter, pantaloon,
     bribe-taker, glutton and buffoon.

        XXVII

     Here, in his red peruke and glasses,
     late of Tambov, Monsieur Triquet
     has come with Kharlikov; he passes
     for witty; in his Gallic way
     inside a pocket Triquet nurses,
     addressed to Tanya, certain verses
     set to well-known children's glee:
     ``réveillez-vous, belle endormie.''
     He found them in some old collection,
     printed among outmoded airs;
     Triquet, ingenious poet, dares
     to undertake their resurrection,
     and for belle Nina, as it read,
     he's put belle Tatiana instead.
     {145}

        XXVIII

     And from the nearby Army station
     the Major's here: he's all the rage
     with our Mamas, and a sensation
     with demoiselles of riper age;
     his news has set the party humming!
     the regimental band is coming,
     sent at the Colonel's own behest.
     A ball: the joy of every guest!
     Young ladies jump for future blisses...
     But dinner's served, so two by two
     and arm in arm they all go through;
     round Tanya congregate the misses,
     the men confront them, face to face:
     they sit, they cross themselves for grace.

        XXIX

     They buzz -- but then all talk's suspended --
     jaws masticate as minutes pass:
     the crash of plates and knives is blended
     with the resounding chime of glass.
     And now there's gradually beginning
     among the guests a general dinning:
     none listens when the others speak,
     all shout and argue, laugh and squeak.
     Then doors are opened, Lensky enters,
     Onegin too. ``Good Lord, at last!''
     the hostess cries and, moving fast,
     the guests squeeze closer to the centres;
     they shove each plate, and every chair,
     and shout, and make room for the pair.
     {146}

        XXX

     Just facing Tanya's where they're sitting;
     and paler than the moon at dawn,
     she lowers darkened eyes, unwitting,
     and trembles like a hunted fawn.
     From violent passions fast pulsating
     she's nearly swooned, she's suffocating;
     the friends' salute she never hears
     and from her eyes the eager tears
     are almost bursting; she's quite ready,
     poor girl, to drop into a faint,
     but will, and reason's strong constraint,
     prevailed, and with composure steady
     she sat there; through her teeth a word
     came out so soft, it scarce was heard.

        XXXI

     The nervous-tragical reaction,
     girls' tears, their swooning, for Eugene
     had long proved tedious to distraction:
     he knew too well that sort of scene.
     Now, faced with this enormous revel,
     he'd got annoyed, the tricky devil.
     He saw the sad girl's trembling state,
     looked down in an access of hate,
     pouted, and swore in furious passion
     to wreak, by stirring Lensky's ire,
     the best revenge one could desire.
     Already, in exultant fashion,
     he watched the guests and, as he dined,
     caricatured them in his mind.
     {147}

        XXXII

     Tanya's distress had risked detection
     not only by Evgeny's eye;
     but looks and talk took the direction,
     that moment, of a luscious pie
     (alas, too salted); now they're bringing
     bottles to which some pitch is clinging:
     Tsimlyansky wine, between the meat
     and the blancmanger, then a fleet
     of goblets, tall and slender pretties;
     how they remind me of your stem,
     Zizi, my crystal and my gem,
     you object of my guileless ditties!
     with draughts from love's enticing flask,
     you made me drunk as one could ask!

        XXXIII

     Freed from its dripping cork, the bottle
     explodes; wine fizzes up... but stay:
     solemn, too long compelled to throttle
     his itching verse, Monsieur Triquet
     is on his feet -- in utter stillness
     the party waits. Seized with an illness
     of swooning, Tanya nearly dies;
     and, scroll in hand, before her eyes
     Triquet sings, out of tune. Loud clapping
     and cheers salute him. Tanya must
     thank him by curtseying to the dust;
     great bard despite his modest trapping,
     he's first to toast her in the bowl,
     then he presents her with the scroll.
     {148}

        XXXIV

     Compliment and congratulation;
     Tanya thanks each one with a phrase.
     When Eugene's turn for salutation
     arrives, the girl's exhausted gaze,
     her discomposure, her confusion,
     expose his soul to an intrusion
     of pity: in his silent bow,
     and in his look there shows somehow
     a wondrous tenderness. And whether
     it was that he'd been truly stirred,
     or half-unwittingly preferred
     a joking flirt, or both together,
     there was a softness in his glance:
     it brought back Tanya from her trance.

        XXXV

     Chairs are pushed outward, loudly rumbling,
     and all into the salon squeeze,
     as from their luscious hive go tumbling
     fieldward, in noisy swarm, the bees.
     The banquet's given no cause for sneezing,
     neighbours in high content are wheezing;
     ladies at the fireside confer,
     in corners whispering girls concur;
     now, by green tablecloths awaited,
     the eager players are enrolled --
     Boston and ombre for the old,
     and whist, that's now so keenly fêted --
     pursuits of a monotonous breed
     begot by boredom out of greed.
     {149}

        XXXVI

     By now whist's heroes have completed
     eight rubbers; and by now eight times
     they've moved around and been reseated;
     and tea's brought in. Instead of chimes
     I like to tell the time by dinner
     and tea and supper; there's an inner
     clock in the country rings the hour;
     no fuss; our belly has the power
     of any Bréguet: and in passing
     I'll just remark, my verses talk
     as much of banquets and the cork
     and eatables beyond all classing
     as yours did, Homer, godlike lord,
     whom thirty centuries have adored!

        < XXXVII7

     At feasts, though, full of pert aggression,
     I put your genius to the test,
     I make magnanimous confession,
     in other things you come off best:
     your heroes, raging and ferocious,
     your battles, lawless and atrocious,
     your Zeus, your Cypris, your whole band
     have clearly got the upper hand
     of Eugene, cold as all creation,
     of plains where boredom reigns complete,
     or of Istómina, my sweet,
     and all our modish education;
     but your vile Helen's not my star --
     no, Tanya's more endearing far.
     {150}

        XXXVIII

     No one will think that worth gainsaying,
     though Menelaus, in Helen's name,
     may spend a century in flaying
     the hapless Phrygians all the same,
     and although Troy's greybeards, collected
     around Priam the much-respected,
     may chorus, when she comes in sight,
     that Menelaus was quite right --
     and Paris too. But hear my pleading:
     as battles go, I've not begun;
     don't judge the race before it's run --
     be good enough to go on reading:
     there'll be a fight. For that I give
     my word; no welshing, as I live. >

        XXXIX

     Here's tea: the girls have just, as bidden,
     taken the saucers in their grip,
     when, from behind the doorway, hidden
     bassoons and flutes begin to trip.
     Elated by the music's blaring,
     Petushkóv, local Paris, tearing,
     his tea with rum quite left behind,
     approaches Olga; Lensky's signed
     Tatyana on; Miss Kharlikova,
     that nubile maid of riper age,
     is seized by Tambov's poet-sage;
     Buyánov whirls off Pustyakova;
     they all have swarmed into the hall,
     and in full brilliance shines the ball.
     {151}

        XL

     Right at the outset of my story
     (if you'll turn back to chapter one)
     I meant to paint, with Alban's8 glory,
     a ball in Petersburg; but fun
     and charming reverie's vain deflection
     absorbed me in the recollection
     of certain ladies' tiny feet.
     Enough I've wandered in the suite
     of your slim prints! though this be treason
     to my young days, it's time I turned
     to wiser words and deeds, and learned
     to demonstrate some signs of reason:
     let no more such digressions lurk
     in this fifth chapter of my work.

        XLI

     And now, monotonously dashing
     like mindless youth, the waltz goes by
     with spinning noise and senseless flashing
     as pair by pair the dancers fly.
     Revenge's hour is near, and after
     Evgeny, full of inward laughter,
     has gone to Olga, swept the girl
     past all the assembly in a whirl,
     he takes her to a chair, beginning
     to talk of this and that, but then
     after two minutes, off again,
     they're on the dance-floor, waltzing, spinning.
     All are dumbfounded. Lensky shies
     away from trusting his own eyes.
     {152}

        XLII

     Now the mazurka sounds. Its thunder
     used in times past to ring a peal
     that huge ballrooms vibrated under,
     while floors would split from crash of heel,
     and frames would shudder, windows tremble;
     now things are changed, now we resemble
     ladies who glide on waxed parquet.
     Yet the mazurka keeps today
     in country towns and suchlike places
     its pristine charm: heeltaps, and leaps,
     and whiskers -- all of this it keeps
     as fresh as ever, for its graces
     are here untouched by fashion's reign,
     our modern Russia's plague and bane.

        XLIII7

        ... ...

     < Petushkóv's nails and spurs are sounding
     (that half-pay archivist); and bounding
     Buyánov's heels have split the wood
     and wrecked the flooring-boards for good;
     there's crashing, rumbling, pounding, trotting,
     the deeper in the wood, the more
     the logs; the wild ones have the floor;
     they're plunging, whirling, all but squatting.
     Ah, gently, gently, easy goes --
     your heels will squash the ladies' toes! >
     {153}

        XLIV

     Buyánov, my vivacious cousin,
     leads Olga and Tatyana on
     to Eugene; nineteen to the dozen,
     Eugene takes Olga, and is gone;
     he steers her, nonchalantly gliding,
     he stoops and, tenderly confiding,
     whispers some ballad of the hour,
     squeezes her hand -- and brings to flower
     on her smug face a flush of pleasure.
     Lensky has watched: his rage has blazed,
     he's lost his self-command, and crazed
     with jealousy beyond all measure
     insists, when the mazurka ends,
     on the cotillion, as amends.

        XLV

     He asks. She can't accept. Why ever?
     No, she's already pledged her word
     to Evgeny. Oh, God, she'd never...
     How could she? why, he'd never heard...
     scarce out of bibs, already fickle,
     fresh from the cot, an infant pickle,
     already studying to intrigue,
     already high in treason's league!
     He finds the shock beyond all bearing:
     so, cursing women's devious course,
     he leaves the house, calls for his horse
     and gallops. Pistols made for pairing
     and just a double charge of shot
     will in a flash decide his lot.
     {154}

        Notes to Chapter Five

     1  ``See First Snow,  a poem by Prince Vyazemsky.'' Pushkin's note. For
Prince P. Vyazemsky (1791--1878), poet, critic and close friend of  Pushkin,
see also Chapter Seven, XLIX.
     2 ``See the descriptions  of the Finnish winter in  Baratynsky's Eda''.
Pushkin's note.
     3  ``"Tomcat calls  Kit"  -- a song  foretelling marriage.''  Pushkin's
note.
     4  This Russianized version of  the Greek Agatho  is  ``elephantine and
rustic to the Russian ear''. Nabokov. See note 3 to Chapter Two.
     5 Girl in Zhukovsky's  poem who practises divination,  with frightening
results. See note 2 to Chapter Three.
     6 Slavonic god of love.
     7 Stanzas XXXVII, XXXVIII and XLIII were discarded by Pushkin.
     8 Francesco Albani, Italian painter (1578-1660).

--------
Chapter Six


          La, sotto giorni nubilosi e brevi.
          Nasce una gente a cui 'l morir non dole.
           Petrarch

        I

     Seeing Vladimir had defected,
     Eugene, at Olga's side, was racked
     by fresh ennui as he reflected
     with pleasure on his vengeful act.
     Olinka yawned, just like her neighbour,
     and looked for Lensky, while the labour
     of the cotillion's endless theme
     oppressed her like a heavy dream.
     It's over. Supper is proceeding.
     Beds are made up; the guests are all
     packed from the maids' wing to the hall.
     Each one by now is badly needing
     a place for rest. Eugene alone
     has driven off, to find his own.
     {155}

        II

     All sleep: from the saloon a roaring
     proclaims where ponderous Pústyakov
     beside his heavier half is snoring.
     Gvozdín, Buyánov, Petushkóv
     and Flyánov, amply lubricated,
     on dining-chairs are all prostrated;
     the floor serves Triquet for his nap,
     in flannel, and an old fur cap.
     In the two sisters' rooms extended,
     the maidens all are slumbering deep.
     Only Tatyana does not sleep,
     but at the window, in the splendid
     radiance of Dian, sits in pain
     and looks out on the darkened plain.

        III

     His unexpected apparition,
     the fleeting tenderness that stole
     into his look, the exhibition
     with Olga, all have pierced her soul;
     she can't make out a single fraction
     of his intent; and a reaction
     of jealousy has made her start,
     as if a cold hand squeezed her heart,
     as if beneath her, dark and rumbling,
     a gulf has gaped... Says Tanya: ``I
     am doomed to perish, yet to die
     through him is sweetness' self. In grumbling
     I find no sense; the truth is this,
     it's not in him to bring me bliss.''
     {156}

        IV

     But onward, onward with my story!
     A new acquaintance claims our quill.
     Five versts or so from Krasnogórie,
     Lensky's estate, there lives and still
     thrives to this moment, in a station
     of philosophic isolation,
     Zarétsky, sometime king of brawls
     and hetman of the gambling-halls,
     arch-rake, pothouse tribune-persona,
     but now grown plain and kind in stead,
     paterfamilias (unwed),
     unswerving friend, correct landowner,
     and even honourable man:
     so, if we want to change, we can!

        V

     The world of fashion, prone to flatter,
     praised his fierce courage in its day:
     true, with a pistol he could shatter
     an ace a dozen yards away;
     it's also true, in battle's rapture,
     the circumstances of his capture
     had made his name, when, bold as bold,
     down from his Kalmuck steed he rolled
     into the mud, a drunken goner,
     and taken by the French -- some prize! --
     resigned himself to prison's ties,
     like Regulus, that god of honour,
     in order daily, chez Véry,1
     to drain, on credit, bottles three.
     {157}

        VI

     Time was, he'd been the wittiest ever,
     so brilliantly he'd hoax the fools,
     so gloriously he'd fool the clever,
     using overt or covert rules.
     Sometimes his tricks would earn him trouble,
     or cause the bursting of his bubble,
     sometimes he'd fall into a trap
     himself just like a simple chap.
     But he could draw a joking moral,
     return an answer, blunt or keen,
     use cunning silence as a screen,
     or cunningly create a quarrel,
     get two young friends to pick a fight,
     and put them on a paced-out site.

        VII

     Or he knew how to reconcile them
     so that all three went off to lunch,
     then later slyly he'd revile them
     with lies and jokes that packed a punch:
     sed alia tempora! The devil
     (like passion's dream, that other revel)
     goes out of us when youth is dead.
     So my Zaretsky, as I said,
     beneath bird-cherries and acacias
     has found a port for his old age,
     and lives, a veritable sage,
     for planting cabbage, like Horatius,
     and breeding ducks and geese as well,
     and teaching children how to spell.
     {158}

        VIII

     He was no fool; appreciated
     by my Eugene, not for his heart,
     but for the effect that he created
     of sense and judgement. For his part
     his converse gave Onegin pleasure;
     so it was not in any measure,
     the morning after, a surprise
     when our Zaretsky met his eyes.
     His visitor from the beginning
     broke greetings off, and gave Eugene
     a note from Lensky; in between
     Zaretsky watched, and stood there grinning.
     Onegin without more ado
     crossed to the window, read it through.

        IX

     Pleasant, in spite of its compression,
     gentlemanly, quite precise,
     Vladimir's challenge found expression
     that, though polite, was clear as ice.
     Eugene's response was automatic;
     he informed this envoy diplomatic
     in terms where not a word was spared:
     at any time he'd be prepared.
     Zaretsky rose without discussion;
     he saw no point in staying on,
     with work at home; but when he'd gone,
     Evgeny, whom the repercussion
     left quite alone with his own soul,
     was far from happy with his role.
     {159}

        X

     With reason, too: for when he'd vetted
     in secret judgement what he'd done,
     he found too much that he regretted:
     last night he'd erred in making fun,
     so heartless and so detrimental,
     of love so timorous and gentle.
     In second place the poet might
     have been a fool; yet he'd a right,
     at eighteen years, to some compassion.
     Evgeny loved him from his heart,
     and should have played a different part:
     no softball for the winds of fashion,
     no boy, to fight or take offence --
     the man of honour and of sense.

        XI

     He could have spoken without harming,
     need not have bristled like a beast;
     he should have settled for disarming
     that youthful heart. ``But now at least
     it's late, time's passing... not to mention,
     in our affair, the intervention
     of that old duellistic fox,
     that wicked, loose-tongue chatterbox...
     True, scorn should punish and should bridle
     his wit, according to the rules
     but whispers, the guffaw of fools...''
     Public opinion -- here's our idol,
     the spring of honour, and the pin
     on which the world is doomed to spin.
     {160}

        XII

     Lensky at home awaits the answer,
     impatient, hatred flaming high;
     but here comes our loud-talking prancer
     who swaggers in with the reply.
     The jealous poet's gloom is lightened!
     knowing the offender, he'd been frightened
     lest he should by some clever trick
     avert his chest from pistol's click,
     smoothe his way out with humour's ointment.
     But now Vladimir's doubts are still:
     early tomorrow at the mill
     before first light they have appointment,
     to raise the safety catch and strain
     to hit the target: thigh or brain.

        XIII

     Still blazing with resentment's fuel,
     and set on hating the coquette,
     Lensky resolved before the duel
     not to see Olga; in a fret
     watched sun and clock -- then by such labours
     defeated, turned up at his neighbour's.
     He thought that Olga'd be confused,
     struck down as if she'd been accused,
     when he arrived; not in the slightest:
     just as she'd always been, she tripped
     to meet the unhappy poet, skipped
     down from the porch, light as the lightest,
     the giddiest hope, carefree and gay,
     the same as any other day.
     {161}

        XIV

     ``Last night, what made you fly so early?''
     was the first thing that Olga said.
     All Lensky's thoughts went hurly-burly,
     and silently he hung his head.
     Rage died, and jealousy's obsession,
     before such candour of expression,
     such frank tendresse; away they stole
     before such playfulness of soul!...
     he looks, in sweet irresolution,
     and then concludes: she loves him yet!
     Already borne down by regret,
     he almost begs for absolution,
     he trembles, knows not what to tell;
     he's happy, yes, he's almost well...

        (XV, XVI,2) XVII

     Now brooding thoughts hold his attention
     once more, at that beloved sight,
     and so he lacks the strength to mention
     the happenings of the previous night;
     he murmurs: ``Olga's mine for saving;
     I'll stop that tempter from depraving
     her youth with all his repertoire
     of sighs, and compliments, and fire;
     that poisonous worm, despised, degrading,
     shall not attack my lily's root;
     I'll save this blossom on the shoot,
     still hardly opened up, from fading.''
     Friends, all this meant was: I've a date
     for swapping bullets with my mate.
     {162}

        XVIII

     If only Lensky'd known the burning
     wound that had seared my Tanya's heart!
     If Tanya'd had the chance of learning
     that Lensky and Eugene, apart,
     would settle, on the morrow morning,
     for which of them the tomb was yawning,
     perhaps her love could in the end
     have reunited friend to friend!
     But, even by accident, her passion
     was undiscovered to that day.
     Onegin had no word to say;
     Tatyana pined in secret fashion:
     of the whole world, her nurse alone,
     if not slow-witted, might have known.

        XIX

     Lensky all evening, in distraction,
     would talk, keep silent, laugh, then frown --
     the quintessential reaction
     of Muses' offspring; sitting down
     before the clavichord with knitted
     forehead, he strummed, his vision flitted
     to Olga's face, he whispered low
     ``I think I'm happy.'' Time to go,
     the hour was late. And now from aching
     the heart inside him seemed to shrink;
     parting with Olga made him think
     it was quite torn in half and breaking.
     She faced him, questioning: ``But you?...''
     ``It's nothing.'' And away he flew.
     {163}

        XX

     Once home, he brought out and inspected
     his pistols, laid them in their case,
     undressed, by candlelight selected
     and opened Schiller... but the embrace
     of one sole thought holds him in keeping
     and stops his doleful heart from sleeping:
     Olga is there, he sees her stand
     in untold beauty close at hand.
     Vladimir shuts the book, for writing
     prepares himself; and then his verse,
     compact of amorous trash, and worse,
     flows and reverberates. Reciting,
     he sounds, in lyric frenzy sunk,
     like Delvig3 when he's dining drunk.

        XXI

     By chance those verses haven't vanished;
     I keep them, and will quote them here:
     ``Whither, oh whither are ye banished,
     my golden days when spring was dear?
     What fate is my tomorrow brewing?
     the answer's past all human viewing,
     it's hidden deep in gloom and dust.
     No matter; fate's decree is just.
     Whether the arrow has my number,
     whether it goes careering past,
     all's well; the destined hour at last
     comes for awakening, comes for slumber;
     blessed are daytime's care and cark,
     blest is the advent of the dark!
     {164}

        XXII

     ``The morning star will soon be shining,
     and soon will day's bright tune be played;
     but I perhaps will be declining
     into the tomb's mysterious shade;
     the trail the youthful poet followed
     by sluggish Lethe may be swallowed,
     and I be by the world forgot;
     but, lovely maiden, wilt thou not
     on my untimely urn be weeping,
     thinking: he loved me, and in strife
     the sad beginnings of his life
     he consecrated to my keeping?...
     Friend of my heart, be at my side,
     beloved friend, thou art my bride!''

        XXIII

     So Lensky wrote, obscurely, limply
     (in the romantic style, we say,
     though what's romantic here I simply
     fail to perceive -- that's by the way).
     At last, with dawn upon him, stooping
     his weary head, and softly drooping
     over the modish word ideal,
     he dozed away; but when the real
     magic of sleep had started claiming
     its due oblivion, in the hush
     his neighbour entered at a rush
     and wakened Lensky by exclaiming:
     ``Get up: it's gone six! I'll be bound,
     Onegin's waiting on the ground.''
     {165}

        XXIV

     But he's mistaken: Eugene's lying
     and sleeping sounder than a rock.
     By now the shades of night are flying,
     Vesper is met by crow of cock --
     Onegin still is slumbering deeply.
     By now the sun is climbing steeply,
     and little dancing whirls of snow
     glitter and tumble as they go,
     but Eugene hasn't moved; for certain
     slumber still floats above his head.
     At last he wakes, and stirs in bed,
     and parts the fringes of his curtain;
     he looks, and sees the hour of day --
     high time he should be on his way.

        XXV

     He rings at once, and what a scurry!
     his French valet, Guillot, is there
     with gown and slippers; tearing hurry,
     as linen's brought for him to wear.
     And while with all despatch he's dressing
     he warns his man for duty, stressing
     that with him to the trysting-place
     he has to bring the battle-case.
     By now the sledge is at the portal --
     he's racing millward like a bird.
     Arrived apace, he gives the word
     to bring across Lepage's4 mortal
     barrels, and then to drive aside
     by two small oaktrees in a ride.
     {166}

        XXVI

     While Lensky'd long been meditating
     impatiently on the mill-dam,
     Zaretsky, engineer-in-waiting,
     condemned the millstones as a sham.
     Onegin comes, and makes excuses;
     but in Zaretsky he induces
     amazement: ``Where's your second gone?''
     In duels a pedantic don,
     methodical by disposition,
     a classicist, he'll not allow
     that one be shot just anyhow --
     only by rule, and strict tradition
     inherited from earlier days
     (for which he must receive due praise).

        XXVII

     Evgeny echoed him: ``My second?
     He's here -- Monsieur Guillot, my friend.
     I had most surely never reckoned
     his choice could shock or might offend;
     though he's unknown, there's no suggestion
     that he's not honest past all question.''
     Zaretsky bit his lip. Eugene
     asked Lensky: ``Should we start, I mean?''
     Vladimir to this casual mention
     replies: ``We might as well.'' They walk
     behind the mill. In solemn talk,
     Zaretsky draws up a convention
     with Guillot; while pourparlers last
     the two foes stand with eyes downcast.
     {167}

        XXVIII

     Foes! Is it long since from each other
     the lust for blood drew them apart?
     long since, like brother linked to brother,
     they shared their days in deed and heart,
     their table, and their hours of leisure?
     But now, in this vindictive pleasure
     hereditary foes they seem,
     and as in some appalling dream
     each coldly plans the other's slaughter...
     could they not laugh out loud, before
     their hands are dipped in scarlet gore,
     could they not give each other quarter
     and part in kindness? Just the same,
     all modish foes dread worldly shame.

        XXIX

     Pistols are out, they gleam, the hammer
     thumps as the balls are pressed inside
     faceted muzzles by the rammer;
     with a first click, the catch is tried.
     Now powder's greyish stream is slipping
     into the pan. Securely gripping,
     the jagged flint's pulled back anew.
     Guillot, behind a stump in view,
     stands in dismay and indecision.
     And now the two opponents doff
     their cloaks; Zaretsky's measured off
     thirty-two steps with great precision,
     and on their marks has made them stand;
     each grips his pistol in his hand.
     {168}

        XXX

     ``Now march.'' And calmly, not yet seeking
     to aim, at steady, even pace
     the foes, cold-blooded and unspeaking,
     each took four steps across the space,
     four fateful stairs. Then, without slowing
     the level tenor of his going,
     Evgeny quietly began
     to lift his pistol up. A span
     of five more steps they went, slow-gaited,
     and Lensky, left eye closing, aimed --
     but just then Eugene's pistol flamed...
     The clock of doom had struck as fated;
     and the poet, without a sound,
     let fall his pistol on the ground.

        XXXI

     Vladimir drops, hand softly sliding
     to heart. And in his misted gaze
     is death, not pain. So gently gliding
     down slopes of mountains, when a blaze
     of sunlight makes it flash and crumble,
     a block of snow will slip and tumble.
     Onegin, drenched with sudden chill,
     darts to the boy, and looks, and still
     calls out his name... All unavailing:
     the youthful votary of rhyme
     has found an end before his time.
     The storm is over,5 dawn is paling,
     the bloom has withered on the bough;
     the altar flame's extinguished now.
     {169}

        XXXII

     He lay quite still, and strange as dreaming
     was that calm brow of one who swooned.
     Shot through below the chest -- and streaming
     the blood came smoking from the wound.
     A moment earlier, inspiration
     had filled this heart, and detestation
     and hope and passion; life had glowed
     and blood had bubbled as it flowed;
     but now the mansion is forsaken;
     shutters are up, and all is pale
     and still within, behind the veil
     of chalk the window-panes have taken.
     The lady of the house has fled.
     Where to, God knows. The trail is dead.

        XXXIII

     With a sharp epigram it's pleasant
     to infuriate a clumsy foe;
     and, as observer, to be present
     and watch him stubbornly bring low
     his thrusting horns, and as he passes
     blush to descry in looking-glasses
     his foolish face; more pleasant yet
     to hear him howl: ``that's me!'' You'll get
     more joy still when with mute insistence
     you help him to an honoured fate
     by calmly aiming at his pate
     from any gentlemanly distance;
     but when you've managed his despatch
     you won't find that quite so much catch...
     {170}

        XXXIV

     What if your pistol-shot has smitten
     a friend of yours in his first youth
     because some glance of his has bitten
     your pride, some answer, or in truth
     some nonsense thrown up while carousing,
     or if himself, with rage arousing,
     he's called you out -- say, in your soul
     what feelings would assume control
     if, motionless, no life appearing,
     death on his brow, your friend should lie,
     stiffening as the hours go by,
     before you on the ground, unhearing,
     unspeaking, too, but stretched out there
     deaf to the voice of your despair?

        XXXV

     Giving his pistol-butt a squeezing,
     Evgeny looks at Lensky, chilled
     at heart by grim remorse's freezing.
     ``Well, what?'' the neighbour says, ``he's killed.''
     Killed!... At this frightful word a-quiver,
     Onegin turns, and with a shiver
     summons his people. On the sleigh
     with care Zaretsky stows away
     the frozen corpse, drives off, and homing
     vanishes with his load of dread.
     The horses, as they sense the dead,
     have snorted, reared, and whitely foaming
     have drenched the steel bit as they go
     and flown like arrows from a bow.
     {171}

        XXXVI

     My friends, the bard stirs your compassion:
     right in the flower of joyous hope,
     hope that he's had no time to fashion
     for men to see, still in the scope
     of swaddling clothes -- already blighted!
     Where is the fire that once ignited,
     where's the high aim, the ardent sense
     of youth, so tender, so intense?
     and where is love's tempestuous yearning,
     where are the reveries this time,
     the horror of disgrace and crime,
     the thirst for work, the lust for learning,
     and life celestial's phantom gleams,
     stuff of the poet's hallowed dreams!

        XXXVII

     Perhaps to improve the world's condition,
     perhaps for fame, he was endowed;
     his lyre, now stilled, in its high mission
     might have resounded long and loud
     for aeons. Maybe it was fated
     that on the world's staircase there waited
     for him a lofty stair. His shade,
     after the martyr's price it paid,
     maybe bore off with it for ever
     a secret truth, and at our cost
     a life-creating voice was lost;
     to it the people's blessing never
     will reach, and past the tomb's compound
     hymns of the ages never sound.
     {172}

        (XXXVIII,2) XXXIX

     Perhaps however, to be truthful,
     he would have found a normal fate.
     The years would pass; no longer youthful,
     he'd see his soul cool in its grate;
     his nature would be changed and steadied,
     he'd sack the Muses and get wedded;
     and in the country, blissful, horned,
     in quilted dressing-gown adorned,
     life's real meaning would have found him;
     at forty he'd have got the gout,
     drunk, eaten, yawned, grown weak and stout,
     at length, midst children swarming round him,
     midst crones with endless tears to shed,
     and doctors, he'd have died in bed.

        XL

     Reader, whatever fate's direction,
     we weep for the young lover's end,
     the man of reverie and reflection,
     the poet struck down by his friend!
     Left-handed from the habitation
     where dwelt this child of inspiration,
     two pines have tangled at the root;
     beneath, a brook rolls its tribute
     toward the neighbouring valley's river.
     The ploughman there delights to doze,
     girl reapers as the streamlet flows
     dip in their jugs; where shadows quiver
     darkly above the water's lilt,
     a simple monument is built.
     {173}

        XLI

     Below it, when sprang rains are swishing,
     when, on the plain, green herbs are massed,
     the shepherd sings of Volga's fishing
     and plaits a piebald shoe of bast;
     and the young city-bred newcomer,
     who in the country spends her summer,
     when galloping at headlong pace
     alone across the fields of space,
     will halt her horse and, gripping tightly
     the leather rein, to learn the tale,
     lift up the gauzes of her veil,
     with a quick look perusing lightly
     the simple legend -- then a haze
     of tears will cloud her tender gaze.

        XLII

     Walking her horse in introspection
     across the plain's enormous room,
     what holds her in profound reflection,
     despite herself, is Lensky's doom;
     ``Olga,'' she thinks, ``what fate befell her?
     her heartache, did it long compel her,
     or did her grief soon find repair?
     and where's her sister now? and where,
     flown from society as we know it,
     of modish belles the modish foe,
     where did that glum eccentric go,
     the one who killed the youthful poet?''
     All in good time, on each point I
     will give you a complete reply.
     {174}

        XLIII

     But not today. Although I dearly
     value the hero of my tale,
     though I'll come back to him, yet clearly
     to face him now I feel too frail...
     The years incline to gloom and prosing,
     they kill the zest of rhymed composing,
     and with a sigh I now admit
     I have to drag my feet to it.
     My pen, as once, no longer hurries
     to spoil loose paper by the ream;
     another, a more chilling dream,
     and other, more exacting worries,
     in fashion's din, at still of night,
     come to disturb me and affright.

        XLIV

     I've learnt the voice of new ambition,
     I've learnt new sadness; but in this
     the first will never find fruition,
     the earlier griefs are what I miss.
     O dreams, o dreams, where is your sweetness?
     where (standard rhyme) are youth and fleetness?
     can it be true, their crown at last
     has felt time's desiccating blast?
     can it be true, and firmly stated
     without an elegiac frill,
     that spring with me has had its fill
     (as I've so oft in jest related)?
     Can it be true, it won't come twice --
     and I'll be thirty in a trice?
     {175}

        XLV

     Well, I must make a frank confession,
     my noon is here, and that's the truth.
     So let me with a kind expression
     take leave of my lightheaded youth!
     Thank you for all the gifts I treasure,
     thank you for sorrow and for pleasure,
     thank you for suffering and its joys,
     for tempests and for feasts and noise;
     thank you indeed. Alike in sorrow
     and in flat calm I've found the stuff
     of perfect bliss in you. Enough!
     My soul's like crystal, and tomorrow
     I shall set out on brand-new ways
     and rest myself from earlier days.

        XLVI

     Let me look back. Farewell, umbrageous
     forests where my young age was passed
     in indolence and in rampageous
     passion and dreams of pensive cast.
     But come, thou youthful inspiration,
     come, trouble my imagination,
     liven the drowsing of my heart,
     fly to my corner like a dart,
     let not the poet's soul of passion
     grow cold, and hard, and stiff as stock,
     and finally be turned to rock
     amid the deadening joys of fashion,
     < amongst the soulless men of pride,
     the fools who sparkle far and wide,6
     {176}

        XLVII

     amongst the crafty and small-minded,
     the children spoilt, the mad, the rogues
     both dull and ludicrous, the bunded
     critics and their capricious vogues,
     amongst devout coquettes, appalling
     lickspittles who adore their crawling,
     and daily scenes of modish life
     where civil treacheries are rife,
     urbane betrayals, and the chilling
     verdicts of vanity the bleak,
     men's thoughts, their plots, the words they speak,
     all of an emptiness so killing -- >
     that's the morass, I beg you note,
     in which, dear friends, we're all afloat!
     {177}

        Notes to Chapter Six

     1 Café-restaurant in Paris.
     2 Stanzas XV, XVI and XXXVIII were discarded by Pushkin.
     3 Anton Delvig, poet and close friend of Pushkin.
     4 Jean Lepage, Parisian gunsmith.
     5  ``A  deliberate  accumulation of  conventional poetical  formulae by
means of  which Pushkin mimics  poor Lensky's own style... but  the rich and
original  metaphor  of the deserted house, closed  inner shutters,  whitened
window-panes, departed  female owner (the soul being  feminine  in Russian),
with which XXXII ends, is Pushkin's own contribution, a sample as it were of
what he can do.'' Nabokov.
     6 These lines and the first twelve lines of stanza XLVII were discarded
by Pushkin.

--------
Chapter Seven


          Moscow, loved daughter of Russia,
          where can we find your equal?
           Dmitriev

          ``How can one not love mother Moscow?''
           Baratynsky

          ``You criticize Moscow? why make such a fuss
          of seeing the world? what on earth could be better?''
          ``A place where you'll find none of us.''
           Griboedov

        I

     By now the rays of spring are chasing
     the snow from all surrounding hills;
     it melts, away it rushes, racing
     down to the plain in turbid rills.
     Smiling through sleep, nature is meeting
     the infant year with cheerful greeting:
     the sky is brilliant in its blue
     and, still transparent to the view,
     the downy woods are greener-tinted;
     from waxen cell the bees again
     levy their tribute on the plain;
     the vales dry out, grow brightly printed;
     cows low, in the still nights of spring
     the nightingale's begun to sing.
     {178}

        II

     O spring! o time for love! how sadly
     your advent swamps me in its flood!
     and in my soul, o spring, how madly
     your presence aches, and in my blood!
     How heavy, and how near to sobbing,
     the bliss that fills me when your throbbing,
     caressing breath has fanned my face
     in rural calm's most secret place!
     Or from all notion of enjoyment
     am I estranged, does all that cheers,
     that lives, and glitters, and endears,
     now crush with sorrow's dull deployment
     a soul that perished long ago,
     and finds the world a darkling show?

        III

     Or, unconsoled by the returning
     of leaves that autumn killed for good,
     are we recalled to grief still burning
     by the new whisper in the wood?
     or else does nature, fresh and staring,
     set off our troubled mind comparing
     its newness with our faded days,
     with years no more to meet our gaze?
     Perhaps, when thoughts are all a-quiver
     in midst of a poetic dream,
     some other, older spring will gleam,
     and put our heart into a shiver
     with visions of enchanted night,
     of distant countries, of moonlight...
     {179}

        IV

     It's time: kind-hearted, idle creatures,
     dons of Epicurean rule,
     calm men with beatific features,
     graduates of the Levshin1 school,
     Priam-like agricultural sages,
     sensitive ladies of all ages --
     the spring invites you to the land
     now warmth and blossom are on hand,
     field-work, and walks with inspiration,
     and magic nights. In headlong course
     come to the fields, my friends! To horse!
     With mounts from home, or postal station,
     in loaded carriages, migrate,
     leave far behind that city-gate.

        V

     Forsake, indulgent reader -- driven
     in your calèche of foreign cast --
     the untiring city, where you've given
     to feasts and fun this winter past;
     and though my muse may be capricious,
     we'll go with her to that delicious
     and nameless rivulet, that scene
     of whispering woods where my Eugene,
     an idle monk in glum seclusion,
     has lately wintered, just a space
     from young Tatyana's dwelling-place,
     dear Tanya, lover of illusion;
     though there he's no more to be found,
     he's left sad footprints on the ground.
     {180}

        VI

     Amidst the hills, down in that valley,
     let's go where, winding all the time
     across green meadows, dilly-dally,
     a brook flows through a grove of lime.
     There sings the nightingale, spring's lover,
     the wild rose blooms, and in the covert
     the source's chattering voice is heard;
     and there a tombstone says its word
     where two old pinetrees stand united:
     ``This is Vladimir Lensky's grave
     who early died as die the brave'' --
     the headpiece-text is thus indited --
     the year, his age, then: ``may your rest,
     young poet, be for ever blest!''

        VII

     There was a pine-branch downward straying
     towards the simple urn beneath;
     time was when morning's breeze was swaying
     over it a mysterious wreath:
     time was, in evening hours of leisure,
     by moonlight two young girls took pleasure,
     closely embraced, in wending here,
     to see the grave, and shed a tear.
     Today... the sad memorial's lonely,
     forgot. Its trodden path is now
     choked up. There's no wreath on the bough;
     grey-haired and weak, beneath it only
     the shepherd, as he used to do,
     sings as he plaits a humble shoe.
     {181}

        (VIII,2 IX,) X

     Poor Lensky! Set aside for weeping,
     or pining, Olga's hours were brief.
     Alas for him! there was no keeping
     his sweetheart faithful to her grief.
     Another had the skill to ravish
     her thoughts away, knew how to lavish
     sweet words by which her pain was banned --
     a Lancer wooed and won her hand,
     a Lancer -- how she deified him!
     and at the altar, with a crown,
     her head in modesty cast down,
     already there she stands beside him;
     her eyes are lowered, but ablaze,
     and on her lips a light smile plays.

        XI

     Poor Lensky! where the tomb is bounded
     by dull eternity's purlieus,
     was the sad poet not confounded
     at this betrayal's fateful news?
     Or, as by Lethe's bank he slumbered,
     perhaps no more sensations lumbered
     the lucky bard, and as he dozed
     the earth for him grew dumb and closed?...
     On such indifference, such forgetting
     beyond the grave we all must build --
     foes, friends and loves, their voice is stilled.
     Only the estate provides a setting
     for angry heirs, as one, to fall
     into an unbecoming brawl.
     {182}

        XII

     Presently Olga's ringing answer
     inside the Larins' house fell mute.
     Back to his regiment the Lancer,
     slave of the service, was en route.
     Weltered in tears, and sorely smarting,
     the old dame wept her daughter's parting,
     and in her grief seemed fit to die;
     but Tanya found she couldn't cry:
     only the pallor of heart-breaking
     covered her face. When all came out
     onto the porch, and fussed about
     over the business of leave-taking,
     Tatyana went with them, and sped
     the carriage of the newly-wed.

        XIII

     And long, as if through mists that spurted,
     Tanya pursued them with her gaze...
     So there she stood, forlorn, deserted!
     The comrade of so many days,
     oh! her young dove, the natural hearer
     of secrets, like a friend but dearer,
     had been for ever borne off far
     and parted from her by their star.
     Shade-like, in purposeless obsession
     she roams the empty garden-plot...
     in everything she sees there's not
     a grain of gladness; tears' repression
     allows no comfort to come through --
     Tatyana's heart is rent in two.
     {183}

        XIV

     Her passion burns with stronger powder
     now she's bereft, and just the same
     her heart speaks to her even louder
     of far-away Onegin's name.
     She'll not see him, her obligation
     must be to hold in detestation
     the man who laid her brother low.
     The poet's dead... already though
     no one recalls him or his verses;
     by now his bride-to-be has wed
     another, and his memory's fled
     as smoke in azure sky disperses.
     Two hearts there are perhaps that keep
     a tear for him... but what's to weep?

        XV

     Evening, and darkening sky, and waters
     in quiet flood. A beetle whirred.
     The choirs of dancers sought their quarters.
     Beyond the stream there smoked and stirred
     a fisher's fire. Through country gleaming
     silver with moonlight, in her dreaming
     profoundly sunk, Tatyana stalked
     for hours alone; she walked and walked...
     Suddenly, from a crest, she sighted
     a house, a village, and a wood
     below a hill; a garden stood
     above a stream the moon had lighted.
     She looked across, felt in her heart
     a faster, stronger pulsing start.
     {184}

        XVI

     She hesitates, and doubts beset her:
     forward or back? it's true that he
     has left, and no one here has met her...
     ``The house, the park... I'll go and see!''
     So down came Tanya, hardly daring
     to draw a breath, around her staring
     with puzzled and confused regard...
     She entered the deserted yard.
     Dogs, howling, rushed in her direction...
     Her frightened cry brought running out
     the household boys in noisy rout;
     giving the lady their protection,
     by dint of cuff and kick and smack
     they managed to disperse the pack.

        XVII

     ``Could I just see the house, I wonder?''
     Tatyana asked. The children all
     rushed to Anisia's room, to plunder
     the keys that opened up the hall.
     At once Anisia came to greet her,
     the doorway opened wide to meet her,
     she went inside the empty shell
     in which our hero used to dwell.
     She looks: forgotten past all chalking
     on billiard-table rests a cue,
     and on the crumpled sofa too
     a riding whip. Tanya keeps walking...
     ``And here's the hearth,'' explains the crone,
     ``where master used to sit alone.
     {185}

        XVIII

     ``Here in the winter he'd have dinner
     with neighbour Lensky, the deceased.
     Please follow me. And here's the inner
     study where he would sleep and feast
     on cups of coffee, and then later
     he'd listen to the administrator;
     in morning time he'd read a book...
     And just here, in the window-nook,
     is where old master took up station,
     and put his glasses on to see
     his Sunday game of cards with me.
     I pray God grant his soul salvation,
     and rest his dear bones in the tomb,
     down in our damp earth-mother's womb!''

        XIX

     Tatyana in a deep emotion
     gazes at all the scene around;
     she drinks it like a priceless potion;
     it stirs her drooping soul to bound
     in fashion that's half-glad, half-anguished:
     that table where the lamp has languished,
     beside the window-sill, that bed
     on which a carpet has been spread,
     piled books, and through the pane the sable
     moonscape, the half-light overall,
     Lord Byron's portrait on the wall,
     the iron figure3 on the table,
     the hat, the scowling brow, the chest
     where folded arms are tightly pressed.
     {186}

        XX

     Longtime inside this modish cloister,
     as if spellbound, Tatyana stands.
     It's late. A breeze begins to roister,
     the valley's dark. The forest lands
     round the dim river sleep; the curtain
     of hills has hid the moon; for certain
     the time to go has long since passed
     for the young pilgrim. So at last
     Tatyana, hiding her condition,
     and not without a sigh, perforce
     sets out upon her homeward course;
     before she goes, she seeks permission
     to come back to the hall alone
     and read the books there on her own.

        XXI

     Outside the gate Tatyana parted
     with old Anisia. The next day
     at earliest morning out she started,
     to the empty homestead made her way,
     then in the study's quiet setting,
     at last alone, and quite forgetting
     the world and all its works, she wept
     and sat there as the minutes crept;
     the books then underwent inspection...
     at first she had no heart to range;
     but then she found their choice was strange.
     To reading from this odd collection
     Tatyana turned with thirsting soul:
     and watched a different world unroll.
     {187}

        XXII

     Though long since Eugene's disapproval
     had ruled out reading, in their place
     and still exempted from removal
     a few books had escaped disgrace:
     Don Juan's and the Giaour's creator,
     two or three novels where our later
     epoch's portrayed, survived the ban,
     works where contemporary man
     is represented rather truly,
     that soul without a moral tie,
     all egoistical and dry,
     to dreaming given up unduly,
     and that embittered mind which boils
     in empty deeds and futile toils.

        XXIII

     There many pages keep the impression
     where a sharp nail has made a dent.
     On these, with something like obsession,
     the girl's attentive eyes are bent.
     Tatyana sees with trepidation
     what kind of thought, what observation,
     had drawn Eugene's especial heed
     and where he'd silently agreed.
     Her eyes along the margin flitting
     pursue his pencil. Everywhere
     Onegin's soul encountered there
     declares itself in ways unwitting --
     terse words or crosses in the book,
     or else a query's wondering hook.
     {188}

        XXIV

     And so, at last, feature by feature,
     Tanya begins to understand
     more thoroughly, thank God, the creature
     for whom her passion has been planned
     by fate's decree: this freakish stranger,
     who walks with sorrow, and with danger,
     whether from heaven or from hell,
     this angel, this proud devil, tell,
     what is he? Just an apparition,
     a shadow, null and meaningless,
     a Muscovite in Harold's dress,
     a modish second-hand edition,
     a glossary of smart argot...
     a parodistic raree-show?

        XXV

     Can she have found the enigma's setting?
     is this the riddle's missing clue?
     Time races, and she's been forgetting
     her journey home is overdue.
     Some neighbours there have come together;
     they talk of her, of how and whether:
     ``Tanya's no child -- it's past a joke,''
     says the old lady in a croak:
     ``why, Olga's younger, and she's bedded.
     It's time she went. But what can I
     do with her when a flat reply
     always comes back: I'll not be wedded.
     And then she broods and mopes for good,
     and trails alone around the wood.''
     {189}

        XXVI

     ``She's not in love?'' ``There's no one, ever.
     Buyánov tried -- got flea in ear.
     And Ivan Petushkóv; no, never.
     Pikhtín, of the Hussars, was here;
     he found Tatyana so attractive,
     bestirred himself, was devilish active!
     I thought, she'll go this time, perhaps;
     far from it! just one more collapse.''
     ``You don't see what to do? that's funny:
     Moscow's the place, the marriage-fair!
     There's vacancies in plenty there.''
     ``My dear good sir, I'm short of money.''
     ``One winter's worth, you've surely got;
     or borrow, say, from me, if not.''

        XXVII

     The old dame had no thought of scouring
     such good and sensible advice;
     accounts were done, a winter outing
     to Moscow settled in a trice.
     Then Tanya hears of the decision.
     To face society's derision
     with the unmistakeable sideview
     of a provincial ingénue,
     to expose to Moscow fops and Circes
     her out-of-fashion turns of phrase,
     parade before their mocking gaze
     her out-of-fashion clothes!... oh, mercies!
     no, forests are the sole retreat
     where her security's complete.
     {190}

        XXVIII

     Risen with earliest rays of dawning,
     Tanya today goes hurrying out
     into the fields, surveys the morning,
     with deep emotion looks about
     and says: ``Farewell, you vales and fountains!
     farewell you too, familiar mountains!
     Farewell, familiar woods! Farewell,
     beauty with all its heavenly spell,
     gay nature and its sparkling distance!
     This dear, still world I must forswear
     for vanity, and din, and glare!...
     Farewell to you, my free existence!
     whither does all my yearning tend?
     my fate, it leads me to what end?''

        XXIX

     She wanders on without direction.
     Often she halts against her will,
     arrested by the sheer perfection
     she finds in river and in hill.
     As with old friends, she craves diversion
     in gossip's rambling and discursion
     with her own forests and her meads...
     But the swift summer-time proceeds --
     now golden autumn's just arriving.
     Now Nature's tremulous, pale effect
     suggests a victim richly decked...
     The north wind blows, the clouds are driving --
     amidst the howling and the blast
     sorceress-winter's here at last.
     {191}

        XXX

     She's here, she spreads abroad; she stipples
     the branches of the oak with flock;
     lies in a coverlet that ripples
     across the fields, round hill and rock;
     the bank, the immobile stream are levelled
     beneath a shroud that's all dishevelled;
     frost gleams. We watch with gleeful thanks
     old mother winter at her pranks.
     Only from Tanya's heart, no cheering --
     for her, no joy from winter-time,
     she won't inhale the powdered rime,
     nor from the bath-house roof be clearing
     first snow for shoulders, breast and head:
     for Tanya, winter's ways are dread.

        XXXI

     Departure date's long overtaken;
     at last the final hours arrive.
     A sledded coach, for years forsaken,
     relined and strengthened for the drive;
     three carts -- traditional procession --
     with every sort of home possession:
     pans, mattresses, and trunks, and chairs,
     and jam in jars, and household wares,
     and feather-beds, and birds in cages,
     with pots and basins out of mind,
     and useful goods of every kind.
     There's din of parting now that rages,
     with tears, in quarters of the maids:
     and, in the yard, stand eighteen jades.
     {192}

        XXXII

     Horses and coach are spliced in marriage;
     the cooks prepare the midday meal;
     mountains are piled on every carriage,
     and coachmen swear, and women squeal.
     The bearded outrider is sitting
     his spindly, shaggy nag. As fitting,
     to wave farewell the household waits
     for the two ladies at the gates.
     They're settled in; and crawling, sliding,
     the grand barouche is on its way.
     ``Farewell, you realms that own the sway
     of solitude, and peace abiding!
     shall I see you?'' As Tanya speaks
     the tears in stream pour down her cheeks.

        XXXIII

     When progress and amelioration
     have pushed their frontiers further out,
     in time (to quote the calculation
     of philosophic brains, about
     five hundred years) for sure our byways
     will blossom into splendid highways:
     paved roads will traverse Russia's length
     bringing her unity and strength;
     and iron bridges will go arching
     over the waters in a sweep;
     mountains will part; below the deep,
     audacious tunnels will be marching:
     Godfearing folk will institute
     an inn at each stage of the route.
     {193}

        XXXIV

     But now our roads are bad, the ages
     have gnawed our bridges, and the flea
     and bedbug that infest the stages
     allow no rest to you or me;
     inns don't exist; but in a freezing
     log cabin a pretentious-teasing
     menu, hung up for show, excites
     all sorts of hopeless appetites;
     meanwhile the local Cyclops, aiming
     a Russian hammer-blow, repairs
     Europe's most finely chiselled wares
     before a fire too slowly flaming,
     and blesses the unrivalled brand
     of ruts that grace our fatherland.

        XXXV

     By contrast, in the frozen season,
     how pleasantly the stages pass.
     Like modish rhymes that lack all reason,
     the winter's ways are smooth as glass.
     Then our Automedons are flashing,
     our troikas effortlessly dashing,
     and mileposts grip the idle sense
     by flickering past us like a fence.
     Worse luck, Larina crawled; the employment
     of her own horses, not the post,
     spared her the expense she dreaded most --
     and gave our heroine enjoyment
     of traveller's tedium at its peak:
     their journey took them a full week.
     {194}

        XXXVI

     But now they're near. Already gleaming
     before their eyes they see unfold
     the towers of whitestone Moscow beaming
     with fire from every cross of gold.
     Friends, how my heart would leap with pleasure
     when suddenly I saw this treasure
     of spires and belfries, in a cup
     with parks and mansions, open up.
     How often would I fall to musing
     of Moscow in the mournful days
     of absence on my wandering ways!
     Moscow... how many strains are fusing
     in that one sound, for Russian hearts!
     what store of riches it imparts!

        XXXVII

     Here stands, with shady park surrounded,
     Petrovsky Castle; and the fame
     in which so lately it abounded
     rings proudly in that sombre name.
     Napoleon here, intoxicated
     with recent fortune, vainly waited
     till Moscow, meekly on its knees,
     gave up the ancient Kremlin-keys:
     but no, my Moscow never stumbled
     nor crawled in suppliant attire.
     No feast, no welcome-gifts -- with fire
     the impatient conqueror was humbled!
     From here, deep-sunk in pensive woe,
     he gazed out on the threatening glow.
     {195}

        XXXVIII

     Farewell, Petrovsky Castle, glimmer
     of fallen glory. Well! don't wait,
     drive on! And now we see a-shimmer
     the pillars of the turnpike-gate;
     along Tverskaya Street already
     the potholes make the coach unsteady.
     Street lamps go flashing by, and stalls,
     boys, country women, stately halls,
     parks, monasteries, towers and ledges,
     Bokharans, orchards, merchants, shacks,
     boulevards, chemists, and Cossacks,
     peasants, and fashion-shops, and sledges,
     lions adorning gateway posts
     and, on the crosses, jackdaw hosts.

        (XXXIX,2) XL

     This wearisome perambulation
     takes up an hour or two; at last
     the coach has reached its destination;
     after Saint Chariton's gone past
     a mansion stands just round a turning.
     On an old aunt, who's long been burning
     with a consumption, they've relied.
     And now the door is opened wide,
     a grizzled Calmuck stands to meet them,
     bespectacled, in tattered dress;
     and from the salon the princess,
     stretched on a sofa, calls to greet them.
     The two old ladies kiss and cry;
     thickly the exclamations fly.
     {196}

        XLI

     ``Princess, mon ange!'' ``Pachette!'' ``Alina!''
     ``Who would have thought it?'' ``What an age!''
     ``How long can you... ?'' ``Dearest kuzina!''
     ``Sit down! how strange! it's like the stage
     or else a novel.'' ``And my daughter
     Tatyana's here, you know I've brought her...''
     ``Ah, Tanya, come to me, it seems
     I'm wandering in a world of dreams...
     Grandison, cousin, d'you remember?''
     ``What, Grandison? oh, Grandison!
     I do, I do. Well, where's he gone?''
     ``Here, near Saint Simeon; in December,
     on Christmas Eve, he wished me joy:
     lately he married off his boy.''

        XLII

     ``As for the other one... tomorrow
     we'll talk, and talk, and then we'll show
     Tanya to all her kin. My sorrow
     is that my feet lack strength to go
     outside the house. But you'll be aching
     after your drive, it's quite back-breaking;
     let's go together, take a rest...
     Oh, I've no strength... I'm tired, my chest...
     These days I'm finding even gladness,
     not only pain, too much to meet...
     I'm good for nothing now, my sweet...
     you age, and life's just grief and sadness...''
     With that, in tears, and quite worn out,
     she burst into a coughing-bout.
     {197}

        XLIII

     The invalid's glad salutation,
     her kindness, move Tatyana; yet
     the strangeness of her habitation,
     after her own room, makes her fret.
     No sleep, beneath that silken curtain,
     in that new couch, no sleep for certain;
     the early pealing of the bells
     lifts her from bed as it foretells
     the occupations of the morning.
     She sits down by the window-sill.
     The darkness thins away; but still
     no vision of her fields is dawning.
     An unknown yard, she sees from thence,
     a stall, a kitchen and a fence.

        XLIV

     The kinsfolk in concerted action
     ask Tanya out to dine, and they
     present her languor and distraction
     to fresh grandparents every day.
     For cousins from afar, on meeting
     there never fails a kindly greeting,
     and exclamations, and good cheer.
     ``How Tanya's grown! I pulled your ear
     just yesterday.'' ``And since your christening
     how long is it?'' ``And since I fed
     you in my arms on gingerbread?''
     And all grandmothers who are listening
     in unison repeat the cry:
     ``My goodness, how the years do fly!''
     {198}

        XLV

     Their look, though, shows no change upon it --
     they all still keep their old impress:
     still made of tulle, the self-same bonnet
     adorns Aunt Helen, the princess;
     still powdered is Lukérya Lvovna,
     a liar still, Lyubóv Petrovna,
     Iván Petróvich still is dumb,
     Semyón Petróvich, mean and glum,
     and then old cousin Pelagéya
     still has Monsieur Finemouche for friend,
     same Pom, same husband to the end;
     he's at the club, a real stayer,
     still meek, still deaf as howd'youdo,
     still eats and drinks enough for two.

        XLVI

     And in their daughters' close embraces
     Tanya is gripped. No comment's made
     at first by Moscow's youthful graces
     while she's from top to toe surveyed;
     they find her somewhat unexpected,
     a bit provincial and affected,
     too pale, too thin, but on the whole
     not bad at all; and then each soul
     gives way to nature's normal passion:
     she's their great friend, asked in, caressed,
     her hands affectionately pressed;
     they fluff her curls out in the fashion,
     and in a singsong voice confide
     the inmost thoughts that girls can hide.
     {199}

        XLVII

     Each others' and their own successes,
     their hopes, their pranks, their dreams at night --
     and so the harmless chat progresses
     coated with a thin layer of spite.
     Then in return for all this twaddle,
     from her they strive to coax and coddle
     a full confession of the heart.
     Tatyana hears but takes no part;
     as if she'd been profoundly sleeping,
     there's not a word she's understood;
     she guards, in silence and for good,
     her sacred store of bliss and weeping
     as something not to be declared,
     a treasure never to be shared.

        XLVIII

     To talk, to general conversation
     Tatyana seeks to attune her ear,
     but the salon's preoccupation
     is with dull trash that can't cohere:
     everything's dim and unenthusing;
     even the scandal's not amusing;
     in talk, so fruitless and so stale,
     in question, gossip, news and tale,
     not once a day a thought will quiver,
     not even by chance, once in a while,
     will the benighted reason smile,
     even in joke the heart won't shiver.
     This world's so vacuous that it's got
     no spark of fun in all its rot!
     {200}

        XLIX

     In swarms around Tatyana ranging,
     the modish Record Office clerks
     stare hard at her before exchanging
     some disagreeable remarks.
     One melancholy fop, declaring
     that she's ``ideal'', begins preparing
     an elegy to her address,
     propped in the door among the press.
     Once Vyázemsky,4 who chanced to find her
     at some dull aunt's, sat down and knew
     how to engage in talk that drew
     her soul's attention; just behind her
     an old man saw her as she came,
     straightened his wig, and asked her name.

        L

     But where, mid tragic storms that rend her,
     Melpomene wails long and loud,
     and brandishes her tinsel splendour
     before a cold, indifferent crowd,
     and where Thalia, gently napping,
     ignores approval's friendly clapping,
     and where Terpsichore alone
     moves the young watcher (as was known
     to happen long ago, dear readers,
     in our first ages), from no place
     did any glasses seek her face,
     lorgnettes of jealous fashion-leaders,
     or quizzing-glasses of know-alls
     in boxes or the rows of stalls.
     {201}

        LI

     They take her too to the Assembly.
     The crush, the heat, as music blares,
     the blaze of candles, and the trembly
     flicker of swiftly twirling pairs,
     the beauties in their flimsy dresses,
     the swarm, the glittering mob that presses,
     the ring of marriageable girls --
     bludgeon the sense; it faints and whirls.
     Here insolent prize-dandies wither
     all others with a waistcoat's set
     and an insouciant lorgnette.
     Hussars on leave are racing hither
     to boom, to flash across the sky,
     to captivate, and then to fly.

        LII

     The night has many stars that glitter,
     Moscow has beauties and to spare:
     but brighter than the heavenly litter,
     the moon in its azure of air.
     And yet that goddess whom I'd never
     importune with my lyre, whenever
     like a majestic moon, she drives
     among the maidens and the wives,
     how proudly, how divinely gleaming,
     she treads our earth, and how her breast
     is in voluptuous languor dressed,
     how sensuously her eyes are dreaming!
     Enough, I tell you, that will do --
     you've paid insanity its due.
     {202}

        LIII

     Noise, laughter, bowing, helter-skelter
     galop, mazurka, waltz... Meanwhile
     between two aunts, in pillared shelter,
     unnoticed, in unseeing style,
     Tanya looks on; her own indictment
     condemns the monde and its excitement;
     she finds it stifling here... she strains
     in dream toward the woods and plains,
     the country cottages and hovels,
     and to that far and lonely nook
     where flows a little glittering brook,
     to her flower-garden, to her novels, --
     to where he came to her that time
     in twilight of allées of lime.

        LIV

     But while she roams in thought, not caring
     for dance, and din, and worldly ways,
     a general of majestic bearing
     has fixed on her a steady gaze.
     The aunts exchanged a look, they fluttered,
     they nudged Tatyana, and each muttered
     at the same moment in her ear:
     ``Look quickly to the left, d'you hear?''
     ``Look to the left? where? what's the matter?''
     ``There, just in front of all that swarm,
     you see the two in uniform...
     just look, and never mind the chatter...
     he's moved... you see him from the side.''
     ``Who? that fat general?'' Tanya cried.
     {203}

        LV

     But here, with our congratulation
     on her conquest, we leave my sweet;
     I'm altering my destination
     lest in forgetfulness complete
     I drop my hero... I'll be truthful:
     ``It is a friend I sing, a youthful
     amateur of caprice and quirk.
     Muse of the epic, bless my work!
     in my long task, be my upholder,
     put a strong staff into my hand,
     don't let me stray in paths unplanned.''
     Enough. The load is off my shoulder!
     I've paid my due to classic art:
     it may be late, but it's a start.
     {204}

        Notes to Chapter Seven

     1 Vasily Levshin (1746-1826), writer on gardening and agriculture.
     2 Stanzas VIII and IX and XXXIX were discarded by Pushkin.
     3 A statuette of Napoleon.
     4 See note 1 to Chapter Five.

--------
Chapter Eight


          Fare thee well, and if for ever,
          Still for ever, fare thee well.
           Byron

     Days when I came to flower serenely
     in Lycée gardens long ago,
     and read my Apuleius keenly,
     but spared no glance for Cicero;
     yes, in that spring-time, in low-lying
     secluded vales, where swans were crying,
     by waters that were still and clear,
     for the first time the Muse came near.
     And suddenly her radiance lighted
     my student cell: she opened up
     the joys of youth, that festal cup,
     she sang of childhood's fun, indited
     Russia's old glories and their gleams,
     the heart and all its fragile dreams.
     {205}

        II

     And with a smile the world caressed us:
     what wings our first successes gave!
     aged Derzhávin1 saw and blessed us
     as he descended to the grave.
        ... ...

        III

     The arbitrary rules of passion
     were all the law that I would use;
     sharing her in promiscuous fashion,
     I introduced my saucy Muse
     to roar of banquets, din of brawling,
     when night patrol's a perilous calling;
     to each and every raving feast
     she brought her talents, never ceased,
     Bacchante-like, her flighty prancing;
     sang for the guests above the wine;
     the youth of those past days in line
     behind her followed wildly dancing;
     among my friends, in all that crowd
     my giddy mistress made me proud.
     {206}

        IV

     When I defected from their union
     and ran far off... the Muse came too.
     How often, with her sweet communion,
     she'd cheer my wordless way, and do
     her secret work of magic suasion!
     How often on the steep Caucasian
     ranges, Lenora2-like, she'd ride
     breakneck by moonlight at my side!
     How oft she'd lead me, by the Tauric
     seacoast, to hear in dark of night
     the murmuring Nereids recite,
     and the deep-throated billows' choric
     hymnal as, endlessly unfurled,
     they praise the Father of the world.

        V

     But then, oblivious of the city,
     its glaring feasts, and shrill events,
     in far Moldavia, fit for pity,
     she visited the humble tents
     of wandering tribesmen; while the ravage
     of their society turned her savage,
     she lost the language of the gods
     for the bleak tongue of boorish clods --
     she loved the steppe-land and its singing,
     then quickly something changed all this:
     look here, as a provincial miss
     she's turned up in my garden, bringing
     sad meditations in her look,
     and, in her hand, a small French book.
     {207}

        VI

     Now for the first time she's escorted
     into the social whirlabout;
     jealously, shyly, I've imported
     her steppeland charms into a rout.3
     Through the tight ranks -- aristocratic,
     military-foppish, diplomatic --
     past the grand ladies, see her glide;
     she sits down calmly on one side,
     admires the tumult and the pressing,
     the flickering tones of dress and speech,
     the young hostess, towards whom each
     new guest is gradually progressing,
     while men, all sombre, all the same,
     set off the ladies like a frame.

        VII

     She enjoys the stately orchestration
     of oligarchical converse,
     pride's icy calm, the combination
     of ranks and ages so diverse.
     But who stands there, in this selected
     assembly, silent and dejected?
     All who behold him find him strange.
     Faces before him flash and change
     like irksome phantoms, null as zero.
     Is spleen his trouble, or the dumb
     torment of pride? And why's he come?
     Who on earth is he? not... our hero?
     No doubt about it, it's Eugene.
     ``How long has he been on the scene?
     {208}

        VIII

     Still as he was? has he stopped prancing?
     does he still pose, and play the freak?
     Now he's returned, what role's he dancing?
     what play will he present this week?
     For what charade is he apparelled?
     Is he a Melmoth, a Childe Harold,
     a patriot, a cosmopolite,
     bigot or prude? or has he quite
     a different mask? is he becoming
     someone like you and me, just nice?
     At least I'll give him some advice:
     to drop all that old-fashioned mumming;
     too long he's hoaxed us high and low...''
     ``You know him, do you?'' ``Yes and no.''

        IX

     However has he earned so vicious,
     so unforgiving a report?
     Is it that we've become officious
     and prone to censure in our thought;
     that fiery souls' headstrong enthusing
     appears offensive or amusing
     to the complacent and the null;
     that wit embarrasses the dull;
     that we enjoy equating chatter
     with deeds; that dunces now and then
     take wing on spite; that serious men
     find, in the trivial, serious matter;
     that mediocre dress alone
     fits us as if it were our own?
     {209}

        X

     Blest he who in his youth was truly
     youthful, who ripened in his time,
     and, as the years went by, who duly
     grew hardened to life's frosty clime;
     who never learnt how dreamers babble;
     who never scorned the social rabble;
     at twenty, was a fop inbred,
     at thirty, lucratively wed;
     at fifty, would prolong the story
     by clearing every sort of debt;
     who, in good time, would calmly get
     fortune, and dignity, and glory,
     who all his life would garner praise
     as the perfection of our days!

        XI

     Alas, our youth was what we made it,
     something to fritter and to burn,
     when hourly we ourselves betrayed it,
     and it deceived us in return;
     when our sublimest aspiration,
     and all our fresh imagination,
     swiftly decayed beyond recall
     like foliage in the rotting fall.
     It's agony to watch the hollow
     sequence of dinners stretch away,
     to see life as a ritual play,
     and with the decorous throng to follow
     although one in no manner shares
     its views, its passions, or its cares!
     {210}

        XII

     To be a butt for the malicious
     is agony, if I may speak,
     and in the eyes of the judicious
     to pass for an affected freak,
     or for a lamentable manic,
     a monster of the gens Satanic,
     or for that Demon4 of my dream.
     Onegin -- now once more my theme --
     had killed his best friend in a duel;
     without a goal on which to fix,
     lived to the age of twenty-six;
     was finding leisure's vacuum cruel;
     and with no post, no work, no wife,
     had nothing to employ his life.

        XIII

     He was the slave of a tenacious,
     a restless urge for change of place
     (an attribute that's quite vexatious,
     though some support it with good grace).
     He's gone away and left his village,
     the solitude of woods and tillage,
     where every day a bloodstained shade
     had come to him in field and glade;
     started a life of pointless roaming,
     dogged by one feeling, only one --
     and soon his travels had begun,
     as all things did, to bore him; homing,
     like Chatsky,5 he arrived to fall
     direct from shipboard into ball.
     {211}

        XIV

     There came a murmur, for a fleeting
     moment the assembly seemed to shake...
     that lady the hostess was greeting,
     with the grand general in her wake --
     she was unhurried, unobtrusive,
     not cold, but also not effusive,
     no haughty stare around the press,
     no proud pretentions to success,
     no mannerism, no affectation,
     no artifices of the vain...
     No, all in her was calm and plain.
     She struck one as the incarnation --
     Shishkov,6 forgive me: I don't know
     the Russian for le comme il faut.

        XV

     Ladies came over, crossed to meet her,
     dowagers smiled as she went by;
     and bending deeply down to greet her
     men made their bows, and sought her eye;
     girls as they passed her spoke less loudly,
     and no one in the room so proudly
     raised nose and shoulders high and wide
     as did the general at her side.
     You'd never class her as a beauty;
     and yet in her you'd not detect --
     rigorously though you'd inspect --
     what London calls, with humble duty
     to fashion's absolute dictate,
     a vulgar touch. I can't translate.
     {212}

        XVI

     And yet, although it's past conveying,
     I really dote upon the word:
     it's new to us, beyond gainsaying;
     from the first moment it was heard
     it had its epigram-potential7...
     But let's return to our essential,
     that lady whose engaging charm
     so effortlessly can disarm.
     She sits with Nina8 at a table --
     bright Northern Cleopatra she:
     but you'll undoubtedly agree
     that marble Nina's proved unable
     to steal away her neighbour's light
     or dim her, dazzle as she might.

        XVII

     ``Can it be she?'' Eugene in wonder
     demanded. ``Yes, she looks... And yet...
     from deepest backwood, furthest under...''
     And every minute his lorgnette
     stays fixed and focused on a vision
     which has recalled, without precision,
     forgotten features. ``Can you say,
     prince, who in that dark-red béret,
     just there, is talking to the Spanish
     ambassador?'' In some surprise
     the prince looks at him, and replies:
     ``Wait, I'll present you -- but you banish
     yourself too long from social life.''
     ``But tell me who she is.'' ``My wife.''
     {213}

        XVIII

     ``You're married? No idea whatever...
     Since when is this?'' ``Two years or more.''
     ``To...?'' ``Larina.'' ``Tatyana? never!''
     ``She knows you?'' ``Why, we lived next door.''
     So to his wife for presentation
     the prince bring up his own relation
     and friend Evgeny. The princess
     gazes at him... and nonetheless,
     however much her soul has faltered,
     however strongly she has been
     moved and surprised, she stays serene,
     and nothing in her look is altered:
     her manner is no less contained;
     her bow, as calm and as restrained.

        XIX

     I don't mean that she never shivered,
     paled, flushed, or lost composure's grip --
     no, even her eyebrow never quivered,
     she never even bit her lip.
     However closely he inspected,
     there was no trace to be detected
     of the old Tatyana. Eugene tried
     to talk to her, but language died.
     How long he'd been here, was her query,
     and where had he arrived from, not
     from their own country? Then she shot
     across to her consort a weary
     regard, and slipped away for good, ...
     with Eugene frozen where he stood.
     {214}

        XX

     Was she the Tanya he'd exhorted
     in solitude, as at the start
     of this our novel we reported,
     in the far backwoods' deepest heart,
     to whom, in a fine flow of preaching,
     he had conveyed some moral teaching,
     from whom he'd kept a letter, where
     her heart had spoken, free as air,
     untouched by trace of inhibition,
     could it be she... or had he dreamed?
     the girl he'd scorned in what he deemed
     the modesty of her condition,
     could it be she, who just had turned
     away, so cool, so unconcerned?

        XXI

     Eugene forsakes the packed reception,
     and home he drives, deep-sunk in thought.
     By dreams now sad in their conception,
     now sweet, his slumbers are distraught.
     He wakes -- and who is this who writes him?
     Prince N. respectfully invites him
     to a soirée. ``My God! to her!...
     I'll go, I'll go!'' -- and in a stir
     a swift, polite reply is written.
     What ails him? he's in some strange daze!
     what moves along the hidden ways
     in one so slothful, so hard-bitten?
     vexation? vainness? heavens above,
     it can't be youth's distemper -- love?
     {215}

        XXII

     Once more he counts the hour-bells tolling,
     once more he can't await the night;
     now ten has struck, his wheels are rolling,
     he drives there like a bird in flight,
     he's up the steps, with heart a-quiver
     led to the princess, all a-shiver,
     finds her alone, and there they sit
     some minutes long. The words won't fit
     on Eugene's lips. In his dejection,
     his awkwardness, he's hardly said
     a single thing to her. His head
     is lost in obstinate reflection;
     and obstinate his look. But she
     sits imperturbable, and free.

        XXIII

     Her husband enters, thus concluding
     their unattractive tête-à-tête;
     he and Onegin start alluding
     to pranks and jokes of earlier date.
     They laugh. The guests begin arriving.
     Already now the talk was thriving
     on modish malice, coarse of grain
     but salt; near the princess a vein
     of unaffectedly fantastic
     invention sparkled, then gave way
     to reasoned talk, no dull hearsay,
     no deathless truths, nothing scholastic;
     and no one's ear could take offence
     at such vivacious, free good sense.
     {216}

        XXIV

     High rank, of course, and fashion's glasses,
     Saint Petersburg's fine flower was there --
     the inevitable silly asses,
     the faces met with everywhere;
     ladies of riper years, delicious
     in rose-trimmed bonnets, but malicious;
     a girl or two, without a smile
     to crack between them; for a while
     one listened to a chief of mission
     on state affairs; there was a wit,
     a grey-haired, perfumed exquisite,
     a joker in the old tradition,
     acute and subtle -- in a word
     all that today we find absurd.

        XXV

     There, with epigrammatic neatness,
     was one who raged and raged again,
     against the tea's excessive sweetness,
     the boring wives, the ill-bred men,
     a novel, vague and superficial,
     two sisters who'd received the initial,9
     the lies that in the press run rife,
     the war, the snowfall, and his wife.
        ... ...
     {217}

        XXVI

     There was -- --,10 so notorious
     through baseness of the soul that he,
     in albums, blunted the censorious
     cartoonist-pencils of Saint-Priest;11
     another of the ball-dictators,
     a fashion-plate for illustrators,
     stood in the door, cherubic, mute,
     frozen in his tight-fitting suit;
     a far-flung traveller who was creaking
     with foppery and too much starch,
     set the guests smiling at his arch,
     affected pose -- and an unspeaking
     unanimous exchange of looks
     entered his sentence in the books.

        XXVII

     But my Eugene that night directed
     his gaze at Tatyana alone --
     not the plain, timorous, dejected
     and lovelorn maiden whom he'd known,
     but the unbending goddess-daughter
     of Neva's proud imperial water,
     the imperturbable princess.
     We all resemble more or less
     our Mother Eve: we're never falling
     for what's been given us to take;
     to his mysterious tree the snake
     is calling us, for ever calling --
     and once forbidden fruit is seen,
     no paradise can stay serene.
     {218}

        XXVIII

     In Tanya, what a transformation!
     how well she'd studied her new role!
     how soon the bounds of rank and station
     had won her loyalty! What soul
     would have divined the tender, shrinking
     maiden in this superb, unthinking
     lawgiver to the modish world?
     Yet once for him her thoughts had whirled,
     for him, at night, before the indulgence
     of Morpheus had induced relief
     she once had pined in girlish grief,
     raised a dull eye to moon's refulgence,
     and dreamt that she with him one day
     jointly would tread life's humble way!

        XXIX

     Love tyrannises all the ages;
     but youthful, virgin hearts derive
     a blessing from its blasts and rages,
     like fields in spring when storms arrive.
     In passion's sluicing rain they freshen,
     ripen, and find a new expression --
     the vital force gives them the shoot
     of sumptuous flowers and luscious fruit.
     But when a later age has found us,
     the climacteric of our life,
     how sad the scar of passion's knife:
     as when chill autumn rains surround us,
     throw meadows into muddy rout,
     and strip the forest round about.
     {219}

        XXX

     Alas, Eugene beyond all query
     is deep in love, just like a boy;
     spends light and darkness in the dreary
     brooding that is the lover's ploy.
     Each day, despite the appeals of reason,
     he drives up in and out of season
     to her glass porch; pursues her round
     close as a shadow on the ground;
     and bliss for him is when he hotly
     touches her hand, or throws a fur
     around her neck, or when for her
     he goes ahead and parts the motley
     brigade of liveries in the hall,
     or else lifts up a fallen shawl.

        XXXI

     But she refuses to perceive him,
     even if he drops or pines away.
     At home she'll equably receive him,
     in others' houses she may say
     a word or two, or stare unseeing,
     or simply bow: within her being
     coquettishness has got no trace --
     the grand monde finds it out of place.
     Meanwhile Onegin starts to languish:
     she doesn't see, or doesn't mind;
     Onegin wastes, you'd almost find
     he's got consumption. In his anguish
     some vote a doctor for the case,
     others prescribe a watering-place.
     {220}

        XXXII

     But go he won't: for him, a letter
     fixing an early rendezvous
     with his forefathers would seem better;
     but she (for women, that's not new)
     remains unmoved: still he's persistent,
     active, and hopeful, and insistent:
     his illness lends him courage and
     to the princess, in his weak hand,
     he sends a letter, penned with passion.
     He deemed, in general, letters vain,
     and rightly so, but now his pain
     had gone in no uncertain fashion
     past all endurance. You're referred
     to Eugene's letter, word for word.
     {221}

        Onegin's Letter to Tatyana

     ``I know it all: my secret ache
     will anger you in its confession.
     What scorn I see in the expression
     that your proud glance is sure to take!
     What do I want? what am I after,
     stripping my soul before your eyes!
     I know to what malicious laughter
     my declaration may give rise!

     ``I noticed once, at our chance meeting,
     in you a tender pulse was beating,
     yet dared not trust what I could see.
     I gave no rein to sweet affection:
     what held me was my predilection,
     my tedious taste for feeling free.
     And then, to part us in full measure,
     Lensky, that tragic victim, died...
     From all sweet things that gave me pleasure,
     since then my heart was wrenched aside;
     freedom and peace, in substitution
     for happiness, I sought, and ranged
     unloved, and friendless, and estranged.
     What folly! and what retribution!

     ``No, every minute of my days,
     to see you, faithfully to follow,
     watch for your smile, and catch your gaze
     with eyes of love, with greed to swallow
     your words, and in my soul to explore
     your matchlessness, to seek to capture
     its image, then to swoon before
     your feet, to pale and waste... what rapture!
     {222}

     ``But I'm denied this: all for you
     I drag my footsteps hither, yonder;
     I count each hour the whole day through;
     and yet in vain ennui I squander
     the days that doom has measured out.
     And how they weigh! I know about
     my span, that fortune's jurisdiction
     has fixed; but for my heart to beat
     I must wake up with the conviction
     that somehow that same day we'll meet...

     ``I dread your stern regard surmising
     in my petition an approach,
     a calculation past despising --
     I hear the wrath of your reproach.
     How fearful, in and out of season
     to pine away from passion's thirst,
     to burn -- and then by force of reason
     to stem the bloodstream's wild outburst;
     how fearful, too, is my obsession
     to clasp your knees, and at your feet
     to sob out prayer, complaint, confession,
     and every plea that lips can treat;
     meanwhile with a dissembler's duty
     to cool my glances and my tongue,
     to talk as if with heart unwrung,
     and look serenely on your beauty!...

     ``But so it is: I'm in no state
     to battle further with my passion;
     I'm yours, in a predestined fashion,
     and I surrender to my fate.''
     {223}

        XXXIII

     No answer comes. Another letter
     he sends, a second, then a third.
     No answer comes. He goes, for better
     or worse, to a soirée. Unheard
     she appears before him, grim and frozen.
     No look, no word for him: she's chosen
     to encase herself inside a layer
     of Twelfth Night's chillest, iciest air.
     To batten down their indignation
     is all those stubborn lips desire!
     Onegin looks with eyes of fire:
     where are distress, commiseration?
     No tearstains, nothing. Wrath alone
     is graven on that face of stone.

        XXXIV

     Perhaps some secret apprehension
     lest signs of casual weakness drew
     her husband's or the world's attention...
     Ah, all that my Onegin knew...
     No hope! no hope! He leaves the revel,
     wishes his madness to the devil,
     drives home -- and plunging deeper in,
     once more renounces world and din.
     And he remembers, in the quiet
     of his own room, how cruel spleen
     had once before, across the scene
     of social buzz and modish riot,
     tracked him, and put him in duress,
     and locked him in a dark recess.
     {224}

        XXXV

     Once more he turned to books, unchoosing,
     devouring Gibbon and Rousseau,
     Manzoni and Chamfort,12 perusing
     Madame de Staël, Bichat,13 Tissot,14
     Herder, and even at times a Russian --
     nothing was barred beyond discussion --
     he read of course the sceptic Bayle15
     and all the works of Fontanelle16 --
     almanacs, journals of reflection,
     where admonitions are pronounced,
     where nowadays I'm soundly trounced,
     but where such hymns in my direction
     were chanted, I remember when --
     e sempre bene, gentlemen.

        XXXVI

     What happened? Though his eyes were reading,
     his thoughts were on a distant goal:
     desires and dreams and griefs were breeding
     and swarming in his inmost soul.
     Between the lines of text as printed,
     his mind's eye focused on the hinted
     purport of other lines; intense
     was his absorption in their sense.
     Legends, and mystical traditions,
     drawn from a dim, warm-hearted past,
     dreams of inconsequential cast,
     rumours and threats and premonitions,
     long, lively tales from wonderland,
     or letters in a young girl's hand.
     {225}

        XXXVII

     Then gradually upon sensation,
     and thought, a sleepy numbness steals;
     before his eyes, imagination
     brings out its faro pack, and deals.
     He sees: in slush, stretched out and keeping
     motionless as one soundly sleeping
     in bed, a young man, stiff and chilled;
     he hears a voice; ``well, what? he's killed!''
     And foes he sees, long-since forgotten,
     a rogue, a slanderer, a poltroon,
     young traitresses by the platoon,
     comrades despised, and comrades rotten;
     a country house -- and one who still
     sits there beside the window-sill!

        XXXVIII

     He got so used to this immersion,
     he almost lost his mind, expired,
     or joined us poets. His conversion
     would have been all that we required!
     It's true, the magnet-like attraction
     of Russian verse, its force in action, --
     my inept pupil, at that hour,
     so nearly had them in his power.
     Who could have looked the poet better,
     as in the nook he'd sit alone
     by blazing fireplace, and intone
     Idol mio or Benedetta,
     and on the flames let fall unseen
     a slipper, or a magazine?
     {226}

        XXXIX

     The days flew past; by now the season
     in warmer airs was half dispersed.
     He's neither died, nor lost his reason,
     nor turned a poet. In the burst
     of spring he lives, he's energetic;
     he leaves one morning the hermetic
     apartment where a double glaze
     has kept him warm in chimney's blaze
     while, marmot-like, he hibernated --
     along the Neva in a sleigh,
     past ice-blocks, blue and squared away,
     he drives in brilliant sun; striated
     along the street lies dirty snow;
     and like an arrow from a bow

        XL

     over the slush, where is he chasing?
     You've guessed before it all began:
     to his Tatyana, yes, he's racing,
     my strange, incorrigible man.
     He goes inside, corpse-like of feature...
     the hall's without a living creature,
     the big room, further, not a cat.
     He opens up a door. What's that
     that strikes him with such force and meaning?
     The princess, sitting peaked and wan,
     alone, with no adornment on;
     she holds a letter up, and leaning
     cheek upon hand she softly cries
     in a still stream that never dries.
     {227}

        XLI

     Who in that flash could not have reckoned
     her full account of voiceless pain?
     Who in the princess for that second
     would not have recognized again
     our hapless Tanya! An emotion
     of wild repentance and devotion
     threw Eugene at her feet -- she stirred,
     and looked at him without a word,
     without surprise or rage... his laden,
     his humbly suppliant approach,
     his dull, sick look, his dumb reproach --
     she sees it all. The simple maiden,
     whose heart on dreams was wont to thrive,
     in her once more has come alive.

        XLII

     Tatyana leaves Onegin kneeling,
     looks at him with a steady gaze,
     allows her hand, that's lost all feeling,
     to meet his thirsty lips... What daze,
     what dream accounts for her distraction?
     A pause of silence and inaction,
     then quietly at last says she:
     ``Enough, stand up. It's now for me
     to give you honest explanation.
     Onegin, d'you recall the day
     when in the park, in the allée
     where fate had fixed our confrontation,
     humbly I heard your lesson out?
     Today it's turn and turn about.
     {228}

        XLIII

     ``For then, Onegin, I was younger,
     and also prettier, I'll be bound,
     what's more, I loved you; but my hunger,
     what was it in your heart it found
     that could sustain it? Only grimness;
     for you, I think, the humble dimness
     of lovelorn girls was nothing new?
     But now -- oh God! -- the thought of you,
     your icy look, your stern dissuasion,
     freezes my blood... Yet all the same,
     nothing you did gave cause for blame:
     you acted well, that dread occasion,
     you took an honourable part --
     I'm grateful now with all my heart.

        XLIV

     ``Then, in the backwoods, far from rumour
     and empty gossip, you'll allow,
     I'd nothing to attract your humour...
     Why then do you pursue me now?
     What cause has won me your attention?
     Could it not be that by convention
     I move in the grand monde? that rank,
     and riches, and the wish to thank
     my husband for his wounds in battle
     earn us the favour of the Court?
     that, for all this, my shame's report
     would cause widespread remark and tattle,
     and so in the salons could make
     a tempting plume for you to take?
     {229}

        XLV

     ``I weep... In case there still should linger
     your Tanya's image in your mind,
     then know that your reproving finger,
     your cold discourse, were less unkind --
     if I had power to choose your fashion --
     than this humiliating passion
     and than these letters, and these tears.
     At least you then showed for my years
     respect, and mercy for my dreaming.
     But now! what brings you to my feet?
     What trifling could be more complete?
     What power enslaves you, with your seeming
     advantages of heart and brain,
     to all that's trivial and inane?

        XLVI

     ``To me, Onegin, all this glory
     is tinsel on a life I hate;
     this modish whirl, this social story,
     my house, my evenings, all that state --
     what's in them? All this loud parading,
     and all this flashy masquerading,
     the glare, the fumes in which I live,
     this very day I'd gladly give,
     give for a bookshelf, a neglected
     garden, a modest home, the place
     of our first meeting face to face,
     and the churchyard where, new-erected,
     a humble cross, in woodland gloom,
     stands over my poor nurse's tomb.
     {230}

        XLVII

     ``Bliss was so near, so altogether
     attainable!... But now my lot
     is firmly cast. I don't know whether
     I acted thoughtlessly or not:
     you see, with tears and incantation
     mother implored me; my sad station
     made all fates look the same... and so
     I married. I beseech you, go;
     I know your heart: it has a feeling
     for honour, a straightforward pride.
     I love you (what's the use to hide
     behind deceit or double-dealing?)
     but I've become another's wife --
     and I'll be true to him, for life.''

        XLVIII

     She went -- and Eugene, all emotion,
     stood thunder-struck. In what wild round
     of tempests, in what raging ocean
     his heart was plunged! A sudden sound,
     the clink of rowels, met his hearing;
     Tatyana's husband, now appearing...
     But from the hero of my tale,
     just at this crisis of his gale,
     reader, we must be separating,
     for long... for evermore. We've chased
     him far enough through wild and waste.
     Hurrah! let's start congratulating
     ourselves on our landfall. It's true,
     our vessel's long been overdue.
     {231}

        XLIX

     Reader, I wish that, as we parted --
     whoever you may be, a friend,
     a foe -- our mood should be warm-hearted.
     Goodbye, for now we make an end.
     Whatever in this rough confection
     you sought -- tumultuous recollection,
     a rest from toil and all its aches,
     or just grammatical mistakes,
     a vivid brush, a witty rattle --
     God grant that from this little book
     for heart's delight, or fun, you took,
     for dreams, or journalistic battle,
     God grant you took at least a grain.
     On this we'll part; goodbye again!

        L

     And my companion, so mysterious,
     goodbye to you, my true ideal,
     my task, so vivid and so serious
     and yet so light. All that is real
     and enviable for a poet,
     in your pursuit I've come to know it:
     oblivion of life's stormy ways,
     sweet talk with friends. How many days
     since, through the mist that dreams arise on,
     young Tanya first appeared to me,
     Onegin too -- and there to see,
     a free romance's far horizon,
     still dim, through crystal's magic glass,
     before my gaze began to pass.
     {232}

        LI

     Of those who heard my opening pages
     in friendly gatherings where I read,
     as Sadi17 sang in earlier ages,
     ``some are far distant, some are dead''.
     They've missed Eugene's completed etching.
     But she who modelled for the sketching
     of Tanya's image... Ah, how great
     the toll of those borne off by fate!
     Blest he who's left the hurly-burly
     of life's repast betimes, nor sought
     to drain its beaker down, nor thought
     of finishing its book, but early
     has wished it an abrupt goodbye --
     and, with my Eugene, so have I.
     {233}

        Notes to Chapter Eight

     1 Gavrila  Derzhávin  (1745-1816), ``Russia's first outstanding  poet''
(Nabokov). While still at the Lyceum in Tsarskoe Selo, in 1815, Pushkin read
some of his verses to him. The stanza was unfinished.
     2 Lenore, romantic ballad by Gottfried August Bürger, 1773.
     3 ``Rout (Eng.),  an evening  assembly without dancing;  means properly
crowd.'' Pushkin's note.
     4 Refers to Pushkin's poem The Demon, of 1823.
     5 Hero of Griboedov's Woe from Wit, 1824.
     6 Admiral Alexander Shishkov (1754-1841)  championed the purity ot  the
Russian language against the encroachment of foreign words.
     7 Probably an allusion to Bulgárin,  an unfriendly  critic of Pushkin's
work.
     8 Nina Voronskoy, imaginary belle of Petersburg society.
     9 Court  decoration given  to  the Empress's ladies-in-waiting.  Stanza
unfinished.
     10 Name left blank by Pushkin.
     11 Count Emmanuel Sen-Pri (1806-1828) had a reputation as a cartoonist.
He was the son of the Comte de Saint-Priest, a French émigré.
     12 Author of Maximes et Pensées, Paris, 1796.
     13  Author  of Recherches physiologiques sur la vie et  la mort, Paris,
1799.
     14 Author of De la santé des gens de lettres, Lausanne and Lyon, 1768.
     15 Pierre Bayle, French philosopher.
     16 Author of Dialogues des Morts, 1683.
     17 Persian poet of the thirteenth century.
Популярность: 69, Last-modified: Sat, 10 Feb 2001 10:50:30 GMT
 Feb 2001 10:50:30 GMT

 it in your heart it found

     that could sustain it? Only grimness;

     for you, I think, the humble dimness

     of lovelorn girls was nothing new?

     But now -- oh God! -- the thought of you,

     your icy look, your stern dissuasion,

     freezes my blood... Yet all the same,

     nothing you did gave cause for blame:

     you acted well, that dread occasion,

     you took an honourable part --

     I'm grateful now with all my heart.



        XLIV



     ``Then, in the backwoods, far from rumour

     and empty gossip, you'll allow,

     I'd nothing to attract your humour...

     Why then do you pursue me now?

     What cause has won me your attention?

     Could it not be that by convention

     I move in the grand monde? that rank,

     and riches, and the wish to thank

     my husband for his wounds in battle

     earn us the favour of the Court?

     that, for all this, my shame's report

     would cause widespread remark and tattle,

     and so in the salons could make

     a tempting plume for you to take?

     {229}



        XLV



     ``I weep... In case there still should linger

     your Tanya's image in your mind,

     then know that your reproving finger,

     your cold discourse, were less unkind --

     if I had power to choose your fashion --

     than this humiliating passion

     and than these letters, and these tears.

     At least you then showed for my years

     respect, and mercy for my dreaming.

     But now! what brings you to my feet?

     What trifling could be more complete?

     What power enslaves you, with your seeming

     advantages of heart and brain,

     to all that's trivial and inane?



        XLVI



     ``To me, Onegin, all this glory

     is tinsel on a life I hate;

     this modish whirl, this social story,

     my house, my evenings, all that state --

     what's in them? All this loud parading,

     and all this flashy masquerading,

     the glare, the fumes in which I live,

     this very day I'd gladly give,

     give for a bookshelf, a neglected

     garden, a modest home, the place

     of our first meeting face to face,

     and the churchyard where, new-erected,

     a humble cross, in woodland gloom,

     stands over my poor nurse's tomb.

     {230}



        XLVII



     ``Bliss was so near, so altogether

     attainable!... But now my lot

     is firmly cast. I don't know whether

     I acted thoughtlessly or not:

     you see, with tears and incantation

     mother implored me; my sad station

     made all fates look the same... and so

     I married. I beseech you, go;

     I know your heart: it has a feeling

     for honour, a straightforward pride.

     I love you (what's the use to hide

     behind deceit or double-dealing?)

     but I've become another's wife --

     and I'll be true to him, for life.''



        XLVIII



     She went -- and Eugene, all emotion,

     stood thunder-struck. In what wild round

     of tempests, in what raging ocean

     his heart was plunged! A sudden sound,

     the clink of rowels, met his hearing;

     Tatyana's husband, now appearing...

     But from the hero of my tale,

     just at this crisis of his gale,

     reader, we must be separating,

     for long... for evermore. We've chased

     him far enough through wild and waste.

     Hurrah! let's start congratulating

     ourselves on our landfall. It's true,

     our vessel's long been overdue.

     {231}



        XLIX



     Reader, I wish that, as we parted --

     whoever you may be, a friend,

     a foe -- our mood should be warm-hearted.

     Goodbye, for now we make an end.

     Whatever in this rough confection

     you sought -- tumultuous recollection,

     a rest from toil and all its aches,

     or just grammatical mistakes,

     a vivid brush, a witty rattle --

     God grant that from this little book

     for heart's delight, or fun, you took,

     for dreams, or journalistic battle,

     God grant you took at least a grain.

     On this we'll part; goodbye again!



        L



     And my companion, so mysterious,

     goodbye to you, my true ideal,

     my task, so vivid and so serious

     and yet so light. All that is real

     and enviable for a poet,

     in your pursuit I've come to know it:

     oblivion of life's stormy ways,

     sweet talk with friends. How many days

     since, through the mist that dreams arise on,

     young Tanya first appeared to me,

     Onegin too -- and there to see,

     a free romance's far horizon,

     still dim, through crystal's magic glass,

     before my gaze began to pass.

     {232}



        LI



     Of those who heard my opening pages

     in friendly gatherings where I read,

     as Sadi17 sang in earlier ages,

     ``some are far distant, some are dead''.

     They've missed Eugene's completed etching.

     But she who modelled for the sketching

     of Tanya's image... Ah, how great

     the toll of those borne off by fate!

     Blest he who's left the hurly-burly

     of life's repast betimes, nor sought

     to drain its beaker down, nor thought

     of finishing its book, but early

     has wished it an abrupt goodbye --

     and, with my Eugene, so have I.

     {233}



        Notes to Chapter Eight



     1 Gavrila  Derzhávin  (1745-1816), ``Russia's first outstanding  poet''

(Nabokov). While still at the Lyceum in Tsarskoe Selo, in 1815, Pushkin read

some of his verses to him











































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































